DUNE MESSIAH 
FRANK HERBERT 
Contents 
Cover 
Title 
Also by Frank Herbert 
Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 
Chapter 5 
Chapter 6 
Chapter 7 
Chapter 8 
Chapter 9 
Chapter 10 
Chapter 11 
Chapter 12 
Chapter 13 
Chapter 14 
Chapter 15 
Chapter 16 
Chapter 17 
Chapter 18 
Chapter 19 
Chapter 20 
Chapter 21 
Chapter 22 
Chapter 23 
Chapter 24 
Epilogue 
Appendix I 
Appendix II 
Appendix III 
Appendix IV 
Terminology of the Imperium 
Cartographic Notes for Map 
Copyright 
Also by Frank Herbert 
The Dune Sequence 
1.  Dune 
2.  Dune Messiah 
3.  Children of Dune 
4.  God-Emperor Of Dune 
5.  Heretics Of Dune 
6.  Chapterhouse Dune 
The Dragon in the Sea 
Destination Void 
The Green Brain 
The Eyes Of Heisenberg 
The Santaroga Barrier 
The Heaven Makers 
Whipping Star 
The Godmakers 
Helstrom’s Hive 
The Dosadi Experiment 
Direct Descent 
The White Plague 
Man Of Two Worlds  (With Brian Herbert) 
Written with Bill Ransom 
1.  The Jesus Incident 
2.  The Lazarus E?ect 
3.  The Ascension Factor 
Collections 
The Worlds Of Frank Herbert 
The Priests Of Psi 
The Book Of Frank Herbert 
Such a rich store of myths enfolds Paul Muad’Dib, the Mentat Emperor, and his 
sister, Alia, it is di?cult to see the real persons behind these veils. But there 
were, after all, a man born Paul Atreides and a woman born Alia. Their ?esh 
was subject to space and time. And even though their oracular powers placed 
them beyond the usual limits of time and space, they came from human stock. 
They experienced real events which left real traces upon a real universe. To 
understand them, it must be seen that their catastrophe was the catastrophe of 
all mankind. This work is dedicated, then, not to Muad’Dib or his sister, but to 
their heirs—to all of us 
. 
—Dedication in the Muad’Dib Concordance as copied from the 
Tabla Memorium of the Mahdi Spirit Cult 
Muad’Dib’s Imperial reign generated more historians than any other era in 
human  history.  Most  of  them  argued  a  particular  viewpoint,  jealous  and 
sectarian, but it says something about the peculiar impact of this man that he 
aroused such passions on so many diverse worlds. 
Of course, he contained the ingredients of history, ideal and idealized. 
This man, born Paul Atreides in an ancient Great Family, received the deep 
prana-bindu  training from the Lady Jessica, his Bene Gesserit mother, and had 
through this a superb control over muscles and nerves. But more than that, 
he  was  a 
  mentat ,  an  intellect  whose  capacities  surpassed  those  of  the 
religiously proscribed mechanical computers used by the ancients. 
Above all else, Muad’Dib was the  Kwisatz Haderach  which the Sisterhood’s 
breeding program had sought across thousands of generations. 
The  Kwisatz  Haderach,  then,  the  one  who  could  be  “many  places  at 
once,”  this  prophet,  this  man  through  whom  the  Bene  Gesserit  hoped  to 
control human destiny—this man became Emperor Muad’Dib and executed a 
marriage of convenience with a daughter of the Padishah Emperor he had 
defeated. 
Think on the paradox, the failure implicit in this moment, for you surely 
have  read  other  histories  and  know  the  surface  facts.  Muad’Dib’s  wild 
Fremen did, indeed, overwhelm the Padishah Shaddam IV. They toppled the 
Sardaukar  legions,  the  allied  forces  of  the  Great  Houses,  the  Harkonnen 
armies and the mercenaries bought with money voted in the Landsraad. He 
brought the Spacing Guild to its knees and placed his own sister, Alia, on the 
religious throne the Bene Gesserit had thought their own. 
He did all these things and more. 
Muad’Dib’s Qizarate missionaries carried their religious war across space 
in a Jihad whose major impetus endured only twelve standard years, but in 
that  time,  religious  colonialism  brought  all  but  a  fraction  of  the  human 
universe under one rule. 
He did this because capture of Arrakis, that planet known more often as 
Dune,  gave  him  a  monopoly  over  the  ultimate  coin  of  the  realm—the 
geriatric spice, melange, the poison that gave life. 
Here was another ingredient of ideal history: a material whose psychic 
chemistry  unraveled  Time.  Without  melange,  the  Sisterhood’s  Reverend 
Mothers  could  not  perform  their  feats  of  observation  and  human  control. 
Without  melange,  the  Guild’s  Steersmen  could  not  navigate  across  space. 
Without  melange,  billions  upon  billions  of  Imperial  citizens  would  die  of 
addictive withdrawal. 
Without melange, Paul Muad’Dib could not prophesy. 
We know this moment of supreme power contained failure. There can be 
only one answer, that completely accurate and total prediction is lethal. 
Other  histories  say  Muad’Dib  was  defeated  by  obvious  plotters—the 
Guild, the Sisterhood and the scienti?c amoralists of the Bene Tleilax with 
their Face-Dancer disguises. Other histories point out the spies in Muad’Dib’s 
household. They make much of the Dune Tarot which clouded Muad’Dib’s 
powers  of  prophecy.  Some  show  how  Muad’Dib  was  made  to  accept  the 
services  of  a 
  ghola ,  the  ?esh  brought  back  from  the  dead  and  trained  to 
destroy him. But certainly they must know this ghola was Duncan Idaho, the 
Atreides lieutenant who perished saving the life of the young Paul. 
Yet, they delineate the Qizarate cabal guided by Korba the Panegyrist. 
They take us step by step through Korba’s plan to make a martyr of Muad’Dib 
and place the blame on Chani, the Fremen concubine. 
How can any of this explain the facts as history has revealed them? They 
cannot. Only through the lethal nature of prophecy can we understand the 
failure of such enormous and far-seeing power. 
Hopefully, other historians will learn something from this revelation. 
—Analysis of History: Muad’Dib by Bronso of Ix 
There exists no separation between gods and men; one blends softly casual into 
the other 
. 
—Proverbs of Muad’Dib 
Despite the murderous nature of the plot he hoped to devise, the thoughts of 
Scytale,  the  Tleilaxu  Face  Dancer,  returned  again  and  again  to  rueful 
compassion. 
I shall regret causing death and misery to Muad’Dib , he told himself. 
He kept this benignity carefully hidden from his fellow conspirators. Such 
feelings told him, though, that he found it easier to identify with the victim 
than with the attackers—a thing characteristic of the Tleilaxu. 
Scytale stood in bemused silence somewhat apart from the others. The 
argument about psychic poison had been going on for some time now. It was 
energetic and vehement, but polite in that blindly compulsive way adepts of 
the Great Schools always adopted for matters close to their dogma. 
“When  you  think  you  have  him  skewered,  right  then  you’ll  ?nd  him 
unwounded!” 
That  was  the  old  Reverend  Mother  of  the  Bene  Gesserit,  Gaius  Helen 
Mohiam,  their  hostess  here  on  Wallach  IX.  She  was  a  black-robed  stick 
?gure, a witch crone seated in a ?oater chair at Scytale’s left. Her aba hood 
had been thrown back to expose a leathery face beneath silver hair. Deeply 
pocketed eyes stared out of skull-mask features. 
They were using a  mirabhasa  language, honed phalange consonants and 
jointed vowels. It was an instrument for conveying ?ne emotional subtleties. 
Edric, the Guild Steersman, replied to the Reverend Mother now with a vocal 
curtsy contained in a sneer—a lovely touch of disdainful politeness. 
Scytale looked at the Guild envoy. Edric swam in a container of orange 
gas only a few paces away. His container sat in the center of the transparent 
dome which the Bene Gesserit had built for this meeting. The Guildsman was 
an elongated ?gure, vaguely humanoid with ?nned feet and hugely fanned 
membranous hands—a ?sh in a strange sea. His tank’s vents emitted a pale 
orange cloud rich with the smell of the geriatric spice, melange. 
“If we go on this way, we’ll die of stupidity!” 
That  was  the  fourth  person  present—the   potential   member  of  the 
conspiracy—Princess Irulan, wife ( 
but not mate , Scytale reminded himself) of 
their mutual foe. She stood at a corner of Edric’s tank, a tall blond beauty, 
splendid in a robe of blue whale fur and matching hat. Gold buttons glittered 
at her ears. She carried herself with an aristocrat’s hauteur, but something in 
the absorbed smoothness of her features betrayed the controls of her Bene 
Gesserit background. 
Scytale’s mind turned from nuances of language and faces to nuances of 
location.  All  around  the  dome  lay  hills  mangy  with  melting  snow  which 
re?ected mottled wet blueness from the small blue-white sun hanging at the 
meridian. 
Why this particular place?  Scytale wondered. The Bene Gesserit seldom did 
anything  casually.  Take  the  dome’s  open  plan:  a  more  conventional  and 
con?ning  space  might’ve  in?icted  the  Guildsman  with  claustrophobic 
nervousness. Inhibitions in his psyche were those of birth and life o?-planet 
in open space. 
To have built this place especially for Edric, though—what a sharp ?nger 
that pointed at his weakness. 
What here, Scytale wondered, was aimed at me? 
“Have you nothing to say  for yourself, Scytale?” the Reverend Mother 
demanded. 
“You wish to draw me into this fools’ ?ght?” Scytale asked. “Very well. 
We’re dealing with a potential messiah. You don’t launch a frontal attack 
upon such a one. Martyrdom would defeat us.” 
They all stared at him. 
“You  think  that’s  the  only  danger?”  the  Reverend  Mother  demanded, 
voice wheezing. 
Scytale shrugged. He had chosen a bland, round-faced appearance for this 
meeting, jolly features and vapid full lips, the body of a bloated dumpling. It 
occurred to him now, as he studied his fellow conspirators, that he had made 
an  ideal  choice—out  of  instinct  perhaps.  He  alone  in  this  group  could 
manipulate ?eshly appearance across a wide spectrum of bodily shapes and 
features. He was the human chameleon, a Face Dancer, and the shape he 
wore now invited others to judge him too lightly. 
“Well?” the Reverend Mother pressed. 
“I was enjoying the silence,” Scytale said. “Our hostilities are better left 
unvoiced.” 
The Reverend Mother drew back, and Scytale saw her reassessing him. 
They were all products of profound prana-bindu training, capable of muscle 
and  nerve  control  that  few  humans  ever  achieved.  But  Scytale,  a  Face 
Dancer, had muscles and nerve linkages the others didn’t even possess plus a 
special quality of 
 sympatico , a mimic’s insight with which he could put on the 
psyche of another as well as the other’s appearance. 
Scytale  gave  her  enough  time  to  complete  the  reassessment,  said: 
“Poison!”  He  uttered  the  word  with  the  atonals  which  said  he  alone 
understood its secret meaning. 
The Guildsman stirred and his voice rolled from the glittering speaker 
globe  which  orbited  a  corner  of  his  tank  above  Irulan.  “We’re  discussing 
psychic  poison, not a physical one.” 
Scytale laughed. Mirabhasa laughter could ?ay an opponent and he held 
nothing back now. 
Irulan smiled in appreciation, but the corners of the Reverend Mother’s 
eyes revealed a faint hint of anger. 
“Stop that!” Mohiam rasped. 
Scytale stopped, but he had their attention now, Edric in a silent rage, the 
Reverend Mother alert in her anger, Irulan amused but puzzled. 
“Our friend Edric suggests,” Scytale said, “that a pair of Bene Gesserit 
witches trained in all their subtle ways have not learned the true uses of 
deception.” 
Mohiam  turned  to  stare  out  at  the  cold  hills  of  her  Bene  Gesserit 
homeworld. She was beginning to see the vital thing here, Scytale realized. 
That was good. Irulan, though, was another matter. 
“Are you one of us or not, Scytale?” Edric asked. He stared out of tiny 
rodent eyes. 
“My allegiance is not the issue,” Scytale said. He kept his attention on 
Irulan. “You are wondering, Princess, if this was why you came all those 
parsecs, risked so much?” 
She nodded agreement. 
“Was it to bandy platitudes with a humanoid ?sh or dispute with a fat 
Tleilaxu Face Dancer?” Scytale asked. 
She stepped away from Edric’s tank, shaking her head in annoyance at the 
thick odor of melange. 
Edric took this moment to pop a melange pill into his mouth. He ate the 
spice and breathed it and, no doubt, drank it, Scytale noted. Understandable, 
because the spice heightened a Steersman’s prescience, gave him the power 
to  guide  a  Guild  heighliner  across  space  at  translight  speeds.  With  spice 
awareness he found that line of the ship’s future which avoided peril. Edric 
smelled another kind of peril now, but his crutch of prescience might not ?nd 
it. 
“I think it was a mistake for me to come here,” Irulan said. 
The Reverend Mother turned, opened her eyes, closed them, a curiously 
reptilian gesture. 
Scytale shifted his gaze from Irulan to the tank, inviting the Princess to 
share his viewpoint. She would, Scytale knew, see Edric as a repellent ?gure: 
the bold stare, those monstrous feet and hands moving softly in the gas, the 
smoky swirling of orange eddies around him. She would wonder about his 
sex habits, thinking how odd it would be to mate with such a one. Even the 
?eld-force generator which recreated for Edric the weightlessness of space 
would set him apart from her now. 
“Princess,” Scytale said, “because of Edric here, your husband’s oracular 
sight  cannot  stumble  upon  certain  incidents,  including  this  one  … 
presumably.” 
“Presumably,” Irulan said. 
Eyes  closed,  the  Reverend  Mother  nodded.  “The  phenomenon  of 
prescience is poorly understood even by its initiates,” she said. 
“I am a full Guild Navigator and have the Power,” Edric said. 
Again, the Reverend Mother opened her eyes. This time, she stared at the 
Face Dancer, eyes probing with that peculiar Bene Gesserit intensity. She was 
weighing minutiae. 
“No,  Reverend  Mother,”  Scytale  murmured,  “I  am  not  as  simple  as  I 
appeared.” 
“We don’t understand this Power of second sight,” Irulan said. “There’s a 
point.  Edric  says  my  husband  cannot  see,  know  or  predict  what  happens 
within the sphere of a Navigator’s in?uence. But how far does that in?uence 
extend?” 
“There are people and things in our universe which I know only by their 
e?ects,” Edric said, his ?sh mouth held in a thin line. “I know they have been 
here … there … somewhere. As water creatures stir up the currents in their 
passage, so the prescient stir up Time. I have seen where your husband has 
been; never have I seen him nor the people who truly share his aims and 
loyalties. This is the concealment which an adept gives to those who are his.” 
“Irulan  is  not  yours,”  Scytale  said.  And  he  looked  sideways  at  the 
Princess. 
“We  all  know  why  the  conspiracy  must  be  conducted  only  in  my 
presence,” Edric said. 
Using the voice mode for describing a machine, Irulan said: “You have 
your uses, apparently.” 
She sees him now for what he is , Scytale thought.  Good! 
“The future is a thing to be shaped,” Scytale said. “Hold that thought, 
Princess.” 
Irulan glanced at the Face Dancer. 
“People who share Paul’s aims and loyalties,” she said. “Certain of his 
Fremen legionaries, then, wear his cloak. I have seen him prophesy for them, 
heard their cries of adulation for their Mahdi, their Muad’Dib.” 
It  has  occurred  to  her ,  Scytale  thought,   that  she  is  on  trial  here,  that  a 
judgment remains to be made which could preserve her or destroy her. She sees the 
trap we set for her . 
Momentarily, Scytale’s gaze locked with that of the Reverend Mother and 
he experienced the odd realization that they had shared this thought about 
Irulan. The Bene Gesserit, of course, had briefed their Princess, primed her 
with the 
 lie adroit . But the moment always came when a Bene Gesserit must 
trust her own training and instincts. 
“Princess, I know what it is you most desire from the Emperor,” Edric 
said. 
“Who does not know it?” Irulan asked. 
“You wish to be the founding mother of the royal dynasty,” Edric said, as 
though he had not heard her. “Unless you join us, that will never happen. 
Take my oracular word on it. The Emperor married you for political reasons, 
but you’ll never share his bed.” 
“So the oracle is also a voyeur,” Irulan sneered. 
“The Emperor is more ?rmly wedded to his Fremen concubine than he is 
to you!” Edric snapped. 
“And she gives him no heir,” Irulan said. 
“Reason  is  the  ?rst  victim  of  strong  emotion,”  Scytale  murmured.  He 
sensed the outpouring of Irulan’s anger, saw his admonition take e?ect. 
“She gives him no heir,” Irulan said, her voice measuring out controlled 
calmness, “because I am secretly administering a contraceptive. Is that the 
sort of admission you wanted from me?” 
“It’d not be a thing for the Emperor to discover,” Edric said, smiling. 
“I have lies ready for him,” Irulan said. “He may have truthsense, but 
some lies are easier to believe than the truth.” 
“You must make the choice, Princess,” Scytale said, “but understand what 
it is protects you.” 
“Paul is fair with me,” she said. “I sit in his Council.” 
“In the twelve years you’ve been his Princess Consort,” Edric asked, “has 
he shown you the slightest warmth?” 
Irulan shook her head. 
“He deposed your father with his infamous Fremen horde, married you to 
?x his claim to the throne, yet he has never crowned you Empress,” Edric 
said. 
“Edric tries to sway you with emotion, Princess,” Scytale said. “Is that not 
interesting?” 
She  glanced  at  the  Face  Dancer,  saw  the  bold  smile  on  his  features, 
answered it with raised eyebrows. She was fully aware now, Scytale saw, 
that if she left this conference under Edric’s sway, part of their plot, these 
moments  might  be  concealed  from  Paul’s  oracular  vision.  If  she  withheld 
commitment, though … 
“Does it seem to you, Princess,” Scytale asked, “that Edric holds undue 
sway in our conspiracy?” 
“I’ve  already  agreed,”  Edric  said,  “that  I’ll  defer  to  the  best  judgment 
o?ered in our councils.” 
“And who chooses the best judgment?” Scytale asked. 
“Do you wish the Princess to leave here without joining us?” Edric asked. 
“He  wishes  her  commitment  to  be  a  real  one,”  the  Reverend  Mother 
growled. “There should be no trickery between us.” 
Irulan, Scytale saw, had relaxed into a thinking posture, hands concealed 
in the sleeves of her robe. She would be thinking now of the bait Edric had 
o?ered:  to found a royal dynasty!  She would be wondering what scheme the 
conspirators  had  provided  to  protect  themselves  from  her.  She  would  be 
weighing many things. 
“Scytale,” Irulan said presently, “it is said that you Tleilaxu have an odd 
system of honor: your victims must always have a means of escape.” 
“If they can but ?nd it,” Scytale agreed. 
“Am I a victim?” Irulan asked. 
A burst of laughter escaped Scytale. 
The Reverend Mother snorted. 
“Princess,” Edric said, his voice softly persuasive, “you already are one of 
us, have no fear of that. Do you not spy upon the Imperial Household for 
your Bene Gesserit superiors?” 
“Paul knows I report to my teachers,” she said. 
“But don’t you give them the material for strong propaganda against your 
Emperor?” Edric asked. 
Not “our” Emperor , Scytale noted.  “Your” Emperor. Irulan is too much the 
Bene Gesserit to miss that slip 
. 
“The question is one of powers and how they may be used,” Scytale said, 
moving closer to the Guildsman’s tank. “We of the Tleilaxu believe that in all 
the universe there is only the insatiable appetite of matter, that energy is the 
only true 
 solid . And energy learns. Hear me well, Princess: energy learns. 
This, we call power.” 
“You haven’t convinced me we can defeat the Emperor,” Irulan said. 
“We haven’t even convinced ourselves,” Scytale said. 
“Everywhere  we  turn,”  Irulan  said,  “his  power  confronts  us.  He’s  the 
Kwisatz Haderach, the one who can be many places at once. He’s the Mahdi 
whose merest whim is absolute command to his Qizarate missionaries. He’s 
the  mentat  whose  computational  mind  surpasses  the  greatest  ancient 
computers. He is Muad’Dib whose orders to the Fremen legions depopulate 
planets. He possesses oracular vision which sees into the future. He has that 
gene pattern which we Bene Gesserits covet for—” 
“We  know  his  attributes,”  the  Reverend  Mother  interrupted.  “And  we 
know the abomination, his sister Alia, possesses this gene pattern. But they’re 
also humans, both of them. Thus, they have weaknesses.” 
“And where are those human weaknesses?” the Face Dancer asked. “Shall 
we  search  for  them in the  religious arm  of his  Jihad?  Can the  Emperor’s 
Qizara be turned against him? What about the civil authority of the Great 
Houses? Can the Landsraad Congress do more than raise a verbal clamor?” 
“I suggest the Combine Honnete Ober Advancer Mercantiles,” Edric said, 
turning in his tank. “CHOAM is business and business follows pro?ts.” 
“Or  perhaps  the  Emperor’s  mother,”  Scytale  said.  “The  Lady  Jessica,  I 
understand, remains on Caladan, but is in frequent communication with her 
son.” 
“That traitorous bitch,” Mohiam said, voice level. “Would I might disown 
my own hands which trained her.” 
“Our conspiracy requires a lever,” Scytale said. 
“We are more than conspirators,” the Reverend Mother countered. 
“Ah, yes,” Scytale agreed. “We are energetic and we learn quickly. This 
makes us the one true hope, the certain salvation of humankind.” He spoke 
in the speech mode for absolute conviction, which was perhaps the ultimate 
sneer coming as it did, from a Tleilaxu. 
Only the Reverend Mother appeared to understand the subtlety. “Why?” 
she asked, directing the question at Scytale. 
Before the Face Dancer could answer, Edric cleared his throat, said: “Let 
us not bandy philosophical nonsense. Every question can be boiled down to 
the one: ‘Why is there anything?’ Every religious, business and governmental 
question has the single derivative: ‘Who will exercise the power?’ Alliances, 
combines, complexes, they all chase mirages unless they go for the power. All 
else is nonsense, as most thinking beings come to realize.” 
Scytale  shrugged,  a  gesture  designed  solely  for  the  Reverend  Mother. 
Edric had answered her question for him. The ponti?cating fool was their 
major  weakness.  To  make  sure  the  Reverend  Mother  understood,  Scytale 
said: “Listening carefully to the teacher, one acquires an education.” 
The Reverend Mother nodded slowly. 
“Princess,” Edric said, “make your choice. You have been chosen as an 
instrument of destiny, the very ?nest ….” 
“Save  your  praise  for  those  who  can  be  swayed  by  it,”  Irulan  said. 
“Earlier, you mentioned a ghost, a revenant with which we may contaminate 
the Emperor. Explain this.” 
“The Atreides will defeat himself!” Edric crowed. 
“Stop talking riddles!” Irulan snapped. “What is this ghost?” 
“A very unusual ghost,” Edric said. “It has a body and a name. The body 
—that’s the ?esh of a renowned swordmaster known as Duncan Idaho. The 
name ….” 
“Idaho’s  dead,”  Irulan  said.  “Paul  has  mourned  the  loss  often  in  my 
presence. He saw Idaho killed by my father’s Sardaukar.” 
“Even in defeat,” Edric said, “your father’s Sardaukar did not abandon 
wisdom.  Let  us  suppose  a  wise  Sardaukar  commander  recognized  the 
swordmaster in a corpse his men had slain. What then? There exist uses for 
such ?esh and training … if one acts swiftly.” 
“A Tleilaxu ghola,” Irulan whispered, looking sideways at Scytale. 
Scytale, observing her attention exercised his Face-Dancer powers—shape 
?owing into shape, ?esh moving and readjusting. Presently, a slender man 
stood before her. The face remained somewhat round, but darker and with 
slightly  ?attened  features.  High  cheekbones  formed  shelves  for  eyes  with 
de?nite epicanthic folds. The hair was black and unruly. 
“A ghola of this appearance,” Edric said, pointing to Scytale. 
“Or merely another Face Dancer?” Irulan asked. 
“No  Face  Dancer,”  Edric  said.  “A  Face  Dancer  risks  exposure  under 
prolonged  surveillance.  No;  let  us  assume  that  our  wise  Sardaukar 
commander  had  Idaho’s  corpse  preserved  for  the  axolotl  tanks.  Why  not? 
This  corpse  held  the  ?esh  and  nerves  of  one  of  the  ?nest  swordsmen  in 
history, an adviser to the Atreides, a military genius. What a waste to lose all 
that training and ability when it might be revived as an instructor for the 
Sardaukar.” 
“I heard not a whisper of this and I was one of my father’s con?dantes,” 
Irulan said. 
“Ahh, but your father was a defeated man and within a few hours you 
had been sold to the new Emperor,” Edric said. 
“Was it done?” she demanded. 
With a maddening air of complacency, Edric said: “Let us presume that 
our wise Sardaukar commander, knowing the need for speed, immediately 
sent the preserved ?esh of Idaho to the Bene Tleilax. Let us suppose further 
that the commander and his men died before conveying this information to 
your father—who couldn’t have made much use of it anyway. There would 
remain then a physical fact, a bit of ?esh which had been sent o? to the 
Tleilaxu. There was only one way for it to be sent, of course, on a heighliner. 
We of the Guild naturally know every cargo we transport. Learning of this 
one, would we not think it additional wisdom to purchase the ghola as a gift 
be?tting an Emperor?” 
“You’ve done it then,” Irulan said. 
Scytale, who had resumed his roly-poly ?rst appearance, said: “As our 
long-winded friend indicates, we’ve done it.” 
“How has Idaho been conditioned?” Irulan asked. 
“Idaho?” Edric asked, looking at the Tleilaxu. “Do you know of an Idaho, 
Scytale?” 
“We sold you a creature called Hayt,” Scytale said. 
“Ah, yes—Hayt,” Edric said. “Why did you sell him to us?” 
“Because we once bred a Kwisatz Haderach of our own,” Scytale said. 
With a quick movement of her old head, the Reverend Mother looked up 
at him. “You didn’t tell us that!” she accused. 
“You didn’t ask,” Scytale said. 
“How did you overcome your Kwisatz Haderach?” Irulan asked. 
“A creature who has spent his life creating one particular representation 
of  his  selfdom  will  die  rather  than  become  the  antithesis  of  that 
representation,” Scytale said. 
“I do not understand,” Edric ventured. 
“He killed himself,” the Reverend Mother growled. 
“Follow me well, Reverend Mother,” Scytale warned, using a voice mode 
which said: You are not a sex object, have never been a sex object, cannot be 
a sex object. 
The Tleilaxu waited for the blatant emphasis to sink in. She must not 
mistake his intent. Realization must pass through anger into awareness that 
the  Tleilaxu  certainly  could  not  make  such  an  accusation,  knowing  as  he 
must  the  breeding  requirements  of  the  Sisterhood.  His  words,  though, 
contained a gutter insult, completely out of character for a Tleilaxu. 
Swiftly, using the mirabhasa placative mode, Edric tried to smooth over 
the moment. “Scytale, you told us you sold Hayt because you shared our 
desire on how to use him.” 
“Edric,  you  will  remain  silent  until  I  give  you  permission  to  speak,” 
Scytale said. And as the Guildsman started to protest, the Reverend Mother 
snapped: “Shut up, Edric!” 
The Guildsman drew back into his tank in ?ailing agitation. 
“Our own transient emotions aren’t pertinent to a solution of the mutual 
problem,”  Scytale  said.  “They  cloud  reasoning  because  the  only  relevant 
emotion is the basic fear which brought us to this meeting.” 
“We understand,” Irulan said, glancing at the Reverend Mother. 
“You must see the dangerous limitations of our shield,” Scytale said. “The 
oracle cannot chance upon what it cannot understand.” 
“You are devious, Scytale,” Irulan said. 
How devious she must not guess , Scytale thought.  When this is done, we will 
possess a Kwisatz Haderach we can control. These others will possess nothing 
. 
“What was the origin of your Kwisatz Haderach?” the Reverend Mother 
asked. 
“We’ve dabbled in various pure essences,” Scytale said. “Pure good and 
pure evil. A pure villain who delights only in creating pain and terror can be 
quite educational.” 
“The old Baron Harkonnen, our Emperor’s grandfather, was he a Tleilaxu 
creation?” Irulan asked. 
“Not one of ours,” Scytale said. “But then nature often produces creations 
as deadly as ours. We merely produce them under conditions where we can 
study them.” 
“I will not be passed by and treated this way!” Edric protested. “Who is it 
hides this meeting from—” 
“You  see?”  Scytale  asked.  “Whose  best  judgment  conceals  us?  What 
judgment?” 
“I  wish  to  discuss  our  mode  of  giving  Hayt  to  the  Emperor,”  Edric 
insisted. “It’s my understanding that Hayt re?ects the old morality that the 
Atreides learned on his birthworld. Hayt is supposed to make it easy for the 
Emperor  to  enlarge  his  moral  nature,  to  delineate  the  positive-negative 
elements of life and religion.” 
Scytale smiled, passing a benign gaze over his companions. They were as 
he’d been led to expect. The old Reverend Mother wielded her emotions like 
a scythe. Irulan had been well trained for a task at which she had failed, a 
?awed  Bene  Gesserit  creation.  Edric  was  no  more  (and  no  less)  than  the 
magician’s hand: he might conceal and distract. For now, Edric relapsed into 
sullen silence as the others ignored him. 
“Do  I  understand  that  this  Hayt  is  intended  to  poison  Paul’s  psyche?” 
Irulan asked. 
“More or less,” Scytale said. 
“And what of the Qizarate?” Irulan asked. 
“It requires only the slightest shift in emphasis, a glissade of the emotions, 
to transform envy into enmity,” Scytale said. 
“And CHOAM?” Irulan asked. 
“They will rally round pro?t,” Scytale said. 
“What of the other power groups?” 
“One invokes the name of government,” Scytale said. “We will annex the 
less powerful in the name of morality and progress. Our opposition will die 
of its own entanglements.” 
“Alia, too?” 
“Hayt is a multi-purpose ghola,” Scytale said. “The Emperor’s sister is of 
an age when she can be distracted by a charming male designed for that 
purpose.  She  will  be  attracted  by  his  maleness  and  by  his  abilities  as  a 
mentat.” 
Mohiam  allowed  her  old  eyes  to  go  wide  in  surprise.  “The  ghola’s  a 
mentat? That’s a dangerous move.” 
“To be accurate,” Irulan said, “a mentat must have accurate data. What if 
Paul asks him to de?ne the purpose behind our gift?” 
“Hayt will tell the truth,” Scytale said. “It makes no di?erence.” 
“So you leave an escape door open for Paul,” Irulan said. 
“A mentat!” Mohiam muttered. 
Scytale  glanced  at  the  old  Reverend  Mother,  seeing  the  ancient  hates 
which  colored  her  responses.  From  the  days  of  the  Butlerian  Jihad  when 
“thinking machines” had been wiped from most of the universe, computers 
had inspired distrust. Old emotions colored the human computer as well. 
“I do not like the way you smile,” Mohiam said abruptly, speaking in the 
truth mode as she glared up at Scytale. 
In the same mode, Scytale said: “And I think less of what pleases you. But 
we  must  work  together.  We  all  see  that.”  He  glanced  at  the  Guildsman. 
“Don’t we, Edric?” 
“You teach painful lessons,” Edric said. “I presume you wished to make it 
plain that I must not assert myself against the combined judgments of my 
fellow conspirators.” 
“You see, he can be taught,” Scytale said. 
“I  see  other  things  as  well,”  Edric  growled.  “The  Atreides  holds  a 
monopoly  on  the  spice.  Without  it  I  cannot  probe  the  future.  The  Bene 
Gesserit  lose  their  truthsense.  We  have  stockpiles,  but  these  are  ?nite. 
Melange is a powerful coin.” 
“Our civilization has more than one coin,” Scytale said. “Thus, the law of 
supply and demand fails.” 
“You think to steal the secret of it,” Mohiam wheezed. “And him with a 
planet guarded by his mad Fremen!” 
“The Fremen are civil, educated and ignorant,” Scytale said. “They’re not 
mad.  They’re  trained  to  believe,  not  to  know.  Belief  can  be  manipulated. 
Only knowledge is dangerous.” 
“But will I be left with something to father a royal dynasty?” Irulan asked. 
They all heard the commitment in her voice, but only Edric smiled at it. 
“Something,” Scytale said. “Something.” 
“It means the end of this Atreides as a ruling force,” Edric said. 
“I  should  imagine  that  others  less  gifted  as  oracles  have  made  that 
prediction,” Scytale said. “For them, 
 mektub al mellah , as the Fremen say.” 
“The thing was written with salt,” Irulan translated. 
As she spoke, Scytale recognized what the Bene Gesserit had arrayed here 
for him—a beautiful and intelligent female who could never be his. 
 Ah, well , 
he thought, 
 perhaps I’ll copy her for another . 
Every  civilization  must  contend  with  an  unconscious  force  which  can  block, 
betray or countermand almost any conscious intention of the collectivity 
. 
—Tleilaxu Theorem (unproven) 
Paul sat on the edge of his bed and began stripping o? his desert boots. They 
smelled rancid from the lubricant which eased the action of the heel-powered 
pumps that drove his stillsuit. It was late. He had prolonged his nighttime 
walk and caused worry for those who loved him. Admittedly, the walks were 
dangerous,  but  it  was  a  kind  of  danger  he  could  recognize  and  meet 
immediately.  Something  compelling  and  attractive  surrounded  walking 
anonymously at night in the streets of Arrakeen. 
He tossed the boots into the corner beneath the room’s lone glowglobe, 
attacked the seal strips of his stillsuit. Gods below, how tired he was! The 
tiredness  stopped  at  his  muscles,  though,  and  left  his  mind  seething. 
Watching the mundane activities of everyday life ?lled him with profound 
envy.  Most  of  that  nameless  ?owing  life  outside  the  walls  of  his  Keep 
couldn’t  be  shared  by  an  Emperor—but  …  to  walk  down  a  public  street 
without attracting attention: what a privilege! To pass by the clamoring of 
mendicant pilgrims, to hear a Fremen curse a shopkeeper: “You have damp 
hands!”…. 
Paul smiled at the memory, slipped out of his stillsuit. 
He stood naked and oddly attuned to his world. Dune was a world of 
paradox now—a world under siege, yet the center of power. To come under 
siege, he decided, was the inevitable fate of power. He stare down at the 
green carpeting, feeling its rough texture against his soles. 
The streets had been ankle deep in sand blown over the Shield Wall on 
the stratus wind. Foot tra?c had churned it into choking dust which clogged 
stillsuit ?lters. He could smell the dust even now despite a blower cleaning at 
the portals of his Keep. It was an odor full of desert memories. 
Other days … other dangers . 
Compared  to  those  other  days,  the  peril  in  his  lonely  walks  remained 
minor. But, putting on a stillsuit, he put on the desert. The suit with all its 
apparatus for reclaiming his body’s moisture guided his thoughts in subtle 
ways,  ?xed  his  movements  in  a  desert  pattern.  He  became  wild  Fremen. 
More than a disguise, the suit made of him a stranger to his city self. In the 
stillsuit, he abandoned security and put on the old skills of violence. Pilgrims 
and townfolk passed him then with eyes downcast. They left the wild ones 
strictly alone out of prudence. If the desert had a face for city folk, it was a 
Fremen face concealed by a stillsuit’s mouth-nose ?lters. 
In truth, there existed now only the small danger that someone from the 
old 
 sietch  days might mark him by his walk, by his odor or by his eyes. Even 
then, the chances of meeting an enemy remained small. 
A swish of door hangings and a wash of light broke his reverie. Chani 
entered bearing his co?ee service on a platinum tray. Two slaved glowglobes 
followed her, darting to their positions: one at the head of their bed, one 
hovering beside her to light her work. 
Chani moved with an ageless air of fragile power—so self-contained, so 
vulnerable.  Something  about  the  way  she  bent  over  the  co?ee  service 
reminded him then of their ?rst days. Her features remained darkly el?n, 
seemingly unmarked by their years—unless one examined the outer corners 
of her whiteless eyes, noting the lines there: “sandtracks,” the Fremen of the 
desert called them. 
Steam wafted from the pot as she lifted the lid by its Hagar emerald knob. 
He could tell the co?ee wasn’t yet ready by the way she replaced the lid. The 
pot—?uting silver female shape, pregnant—had come to him as a 
 ghanima , a 
spoil  of  battle  won  when  he’d  slain  the  former  owner  in  single  combat. 
Jamis, that’d been the man’s name … Jamis. What an odd immortality death 
had earned for Jamis. Knowing death to be inevitable, had Jamis carried that 
particular one in his mind? 
Chani put out cups: blue pottery squatting like attendants beneath the 
immense pot. There were three cups: one for each drinker and one for all the 
former owners. 
“It’ll only be a moment,” she said. 
She looked at him then, and Paul wondered how he appeared in her eyes. 
Was  he  yet  the  exotic  o?worlder,  slim  and  wiry  but  water-fat  when 
compared to Fremen? Had he remained the Usul of his tribal name who’d 
taken her in “Fremen 
 tau”  while they’d been fugitives in the desert? 
Paul stared down at his own body: hard muscles, slender … a few more 
scars, but essentially the same despite twelve years as Emperor. Looking up, 
he glimpsed his face in a shelf mirror—blue-blue Fremen eyes, mark of spice 
addiction;  a  sharp  Atreides  nose.  He  looked  the  proper  grandson  for  an 
Atreides who’d died in the bull ring creating a spectacle for his people. 
Something the old man had said slipped then into Paul’s mind:  “One who 
rules assumes irrevocable responsibility for the ruled. You are a husbandman. This 
demands, at times, a sel?ess act of love which may only be amusing to those you 
rule.” 
People still remembered that old man with a?ection. 
And what have I done for the Atreides name?  Paul asked himself.  I’ve loosed 
the wolf among the sheep 
. 
For a moment, he contemplated all the death and violence going on in his 
name. 
“Into bed now!” Chani said in a sharp tone of command that Paul knew 
would’ve shocked his Imperial subjects. 
He obeyed, lay back with his hands behind his head, letting himself be 
lulled by the pleasant familiarity of Chani’s movements. 
The room around them struck him suddenly with amusement. It was not 
at all what the populace must imagine as the Emperor’s bedchamber. The 
yellow light of restless glowglobes moved the shadows in an array of colored 
glass jars on a shelf behind Chani. Paul named their contents silently—the 
dry ingredients of the desert pharmacopoeia, unguents, incense, mementos … 
a pinch of sand from Sietch Tabr, a lock of hair from their ?rstborn … long 
dead … twelve years dead … an innocent bystander killed in the battle that 
had made Paul Emperor. 
The  rich  odor  of  spice-co?ee  ?lled  the  room.  Paul  inhaled,  his  glance 
falling  on  a  yellow  bowl  beside  the  tray  where  Chani  was  preparing  the 
co?ee. The bowl held ground nuts. The inevitable poison-snooper mounted 
beneath the table waved its insect arms over the food. The snooper angered 
him. They’d never needed snoopers in the desert days! 
“Co?ee’s ready,” Chani said. “Are you hungry?” 
His angry denial was drowned in the whistling scream of a spice lighter 
hurling itself spaceward from the ?eld outside Arrakeen. 
Chani saw his anger, though, poured their co?ee, put a cup near his hand. 
She sat down on the foot of the bed, exposed his legs, began rubbing them 
where the muscles were knotted from walking in the stillsuit. Softly, with a 
casual air which did not deceive him, she said: “Let us discuss Irulan’s desire 
for a child.” 
Paul’s eyes snapped wide open. He studied Chani carefully. “Irulan’s been 
back  from  Wallach  less  than  two  days,”  he  said.  “Has  she  been  at  you 
already?” 
“We’ve not discussed her frustrations,” Chani said. 
Paul forced his mind to mental alertness, examined Chani in the harsh 
light of observational minutiae, the Bene Gesserit Way his mother had taught 
him in violation of her vows. It was a thing he didn’t like doing with Chani. 
Part of her hold on him lay in the fact he so seldom needed his tension- 
building  powers  with  her.  Chani  mostly  avoided  indiscreet  questions.  She 
maintained a Fremen sense of good manners. Hers were more often practical 
questions. What interested Chani were facts which bore on the position of 
her man—his strength in Council, the loyalty of his legions, the abilities and 
talents of his allies. Her memory held catalogs of names and cross-indexed 
details. She could rattle o? the major weakness of every known enemy, the 
potential  dispositions  of  opposing  forces,  battle  plans  of  their  military 
leaders, the tooling and production capacities of basic industries. 
Why now, Paul wondered, did she ask about Irulan? 
“I’ve troubled your mind,” Chani said. “That wasn’t my intention.” 
“What was your intention?” 
She smiled shyly, meeting his gaze. “If you’re angered, love, please don’t 
hide it.” 
Paul sank back against the headboard. “Shall I put her away?” he asked. 
“Her use is limited now and I don’t like the things I sense about her trip 
home to the Sisterhood.” 
“You’ll not put her away,” Chani said. She went on massaging his legs, 
spoke matter-of-factly: “You’ve said many times she’s your contact with our 
enemies, that you can read their plans through her actions.” 
“Then why ask about her desire for a child?” 
“I  think  it’d  disconcert  our  enemies  and  put  Irulan  in  a  vulnerable 
position should you make her pregnant.” 
He read by the movements of her hands on his legs what that statement 
had cost her. A lump rose in his throat. Softly, he said: “Chani, beloved, I 
swore an oath never to take her into my bed. A child would give her too 
much power. Would you have her displace you?” 
“I have no place.” 
“Not so, Sihaya, my desert springtime. What is this sudden concern for 
Irulan?” 
“It’s concern for you, not for her! If she carried an Atreides child, her 
friends would question her loyalties. The less trust our enemies place in her, 
the less use she is to them.” 
“A  child  for  her  could  mean  your  death,”  Paul  said.  “You  know  the 
plotting in this place.” A movement of his arm encompassed the Keep. 
“You must have an heir!” she husked. 
“Ahhh,” he said. 
So that was it: Chani had not produced a child for him. Someone else, 
then, must do it. Why not Irulan? That was the way Chani’s mind worked. 
And it must be done in an act of love because all the Empire avowed strong 
taboos against arti?cial ways. Chani had come to a Fremen decision. 
Paul studied her face in this new light. It was a face he knew better in 
some ways than his own. He had seen this face soft with passion, in the 
sweetness of sleep, awash in fears and angers and griefs. 
He closed his eyes, and Chani came into his memories as a girl once more 
—veiled in springtime, singing, waking from sleep beside him—so perfect 
that the very vision of her consumed him. In his memory, she smiled … shyly 
at ?rst, then strained against the vision as though she longed to escape. 
Paul’s mouth went dry. For a moment, his nostrils tasted the smoke of a 
devastated future and the voice of another kind of vision commanding him to 
disengage  …  disengage  …  disengage.  His  prophetic  visions  had  been 
eavesdropping on eternity for such a long while, catching snatches of foreign 
tongues, listening to stones and to ?esh not his own. Since the day of his ?rst 
encounter with terrible purpose, he had peered at the future, hoping to ?nd 
peace. 
There existed a way, of course. He knew it by heart without knowing the 
heart  of  it—a  rote  future,  strict  in  its  instructions  to  him:  disengage, 
disengage, disengage …. 
Paul  opened  his  eyes,  looked  at  the  decision  in  Chani’s  face.  She  had 
stopped  massaging  his  legs,  sat  still  now—purest  Fremen.  Her  features 
remained familiar beneath the blue  nezhoni  scarf she often wore about her 
hair in the privacy of their chambers. But the mask of decision sat on her, an 
ancient and alien-to-him way of thinking. Fremen women had shared their 
men for thousands of years—not always in peace but with a way of making 
the fact nondestructive. Something mysteriously Fremen in this fashion had 
happened in Chani. 
“You’ll give me the only heir I want,” he said. 
“You’ve  seen  this?” she asked, making it obvious by her emphasis that she 
referred to prescience. 
As he had done many times, Paul wondered how he could explain the 
delicacy of the oracle, the Timelines without number which vision waved 
before him on an undulating fabric. He sighed, remembered water lifted from 
a river in the hollow of his hands—trembling, draining. Memory drenched 
his face in it. How could he drench himself in futures growing increasingly 
obscure from the pressure of too many oracles? 
“You’ve not  seen  it, then,” Chani said. 
That  vision-future  scarce  any  longer  accessible  to  him  except  at  the 
expenditure  of  life-draining  e?ort,  what  could  it  show  them  except  grief? 
Paul asked himself. He felt that he occupied an inhospitable middle zone, a 
wasted  place  where  his  emotions  drifted,  swayed,  swept  outward  in 
unchecked restlessness. 
Chani  covered  his  legs,  said:  “An  heir  to  House  Atreides,  this  is  not 
something you leave to chance or one woman.” 
That was a thing his mother might’ve said, Paul thought. He wondered if 
the Lady Jessica had been in secret communication with Chani. His mother 
would  think  in  terms  of  House  Atreides.  It  was  a  pattern  bred  and 
conditioned into her by the Bene Gesserit, and would hold true even now 
when her powers were turned against the Sisterhood. 
“You listened when Irulan came to me today,” he accused. 
“I listened.” She spoke without looking at him. 
Paul focused his memory on the encounter with Irulan. He’d let himself 
into  the  family  salon,  noted  an  un?nished  robe  on  Chani’s  loom.  There’d 
been an acrid wormsmell to the place, an evil odor which almost hid the 
underlying cinnamon bite of melange. Someone had spilled unchanged spice 
essence and left it to combine there with a spice-based rug. It had not been a 
felicitous combination. Spice essence had dissolved the rug. Oily marks lay 
congealed on the plastone ?oor where the rug had been. He’d thought to 
send  for  someone  to  clean  away  the  mess,  but  Harah,  Stilgar’s  wife  and 
Chani’s closest feminine friend, had slipped in to announce Irulan. 
He’d been forced to conduct the interview in the presence of that evil 
smell,  unable  to  escape  a  Fremen  superstition  that  evil  smells  foretold 
disaster. 
Harah withdrew as Irulan entered. 
“Welcome,” Paul said. 
Irulan wore a robe of gray whale fur. She pulled it close, touched a hand 
to her hair. He could see her wondering at his mild tone. The angry words 
she’d obviously prepared for this meeting could be sensed leaving her mind 
in a welter of second thoughts. 
“You  came  to  report  that  the  Sisterhood  has  lost  its  last  vestige  of 
morality,” he said. 
“Isn’t it dangerous to be that ridiculous?” she asked. 
“To be ridiculous and dangerous, a questionable alliance,” he said. His 
renegade  Bene  Gesserit  training  detected  her  putting  down  an  impulse  to 
withdraw. The e?ort exposed a brief glimpse of underlying fear, and he saw 
she’d been assigned a task not to her liking. 
“They expect a bit too much from a princess of the blood royal,” he said. 
Irulan grew very still and Paul became aware that she had locked herself 
into  a  viselike  control.  A  heavy  burden,  indeed,  he  thought.  And  he 
wondered why prescient visions had given him no glimpse of this possible 
future. 
Slowly, Irulan relaxed. There was no point in surrendering to fear, no 
point in retreat, she had decided. 
“You’ve allowed the weather to fall into a very primitive pattern,” she 
said,  rubbing  her  arms  through  the  robe.  “It  was  dry  and  there  was  a 
sandstorm today. Are you never going to let it rain here?” 
“You didn’t come here to talk about the weather,” Paul said. He felt that 
he had been submerged in double meanings. Was Irulan trying to tell him 
something which her training would not permit her to say openly? It seemed 
that way. He felt that he had been cast adrift suddenly and now must thrash 
his way back to some steady place. 
“I must have a child,” she said. 
He shook his head from side to side. 
“I must have my way!” she snapped. “If need be, I’ll ?nd another father 
for my child. I’ll cuckold you and dare you to expose me.” 
“Cuckold me all you wish,” he said, “but no child.” 
“How can you stop me?” 
With a smile of utmost kindness, he said: “I’d have you garrotted, if it 
came to that.” 
Shocked silence held her for a moment and Paul sensed Chani listening 
behind the heavy draperies into their private apartments. 
“I am your wife,” Irulan whispered. 
“Let us not play these silly games,” he said. “You play a part, no more. 
We both know who my wife is.” 
“And  I  am  a  convenience,  nothing  more,”  she  said,  voice  heavy  with 
bitterness. 
“I have no wish to be cruel to you,” he said. 
“You chose me for this position.” 
“Not  I,”  he  said.  “Fate  chose  you.  Your  father  chose  you.  The  Bene 
Gesserit chose you. The Guild chose you. And they have chosen you once 
more. For what have they chosen you, Irulan?” 
“Why can’t I have your child?” 
“Because that’s a role for which you weren’t chosen.” 
“It’s my right to bear the royal heir! My father was—” 
“Your father was and is a beast. We both know he’d lost almost all touch 
with the humanity he was supposed to rule and protect.” 
“Was he hated less than you’re hated?” she ?ared. 
“A good question,” he agreed, a sardonic smile touching the edges of his 
mouth. 
“You say you’ve no wish to be cruel to me, yet….” 
“And  that’s  why  I  agree  that  you  can  take  any  lover  you  choose.  But 
understand me well: take a lover, but bring no sour-fathered child into my 
household. I would deny such a child. I don’t begrudge you any male alliance 
as long as you are discreet … and childless. I’d be silly to feel otherwise 
under the circumstances. But don’t presume upon this license which I freely 
bestow. Where the throne is concerned, I control what blood is heir to it. The 
Bene  Gesserit  doesn’t  control  this,  nor  does  the  Guild.  This  is  one  of  the 
privileges I won when I smashed your father’s Sardaukar legions out there on 
the Plain of Arrakeen.” 
“It’s on your head, then,” Irulan said. She whirled and swept out of the 
chamber. 
Remembering the encounter now, Paul brought his awareness out of it 
and focused on Chani seated beside him on their bed. He could understand 
his  ambivalent  feelings  about  Irulan,  understand  Chani’s  Fremen  decision. 
Under other circumstances Chani and Irulan might have been friends. 
“What have you decided?” Chani asked. 
“No child,” he said. 
Chani made the Fremen crysknife sign with the index ?nger and thumb of 
her right hand. 
“It could come to that,” he agreed. 
“You don’t think a child would solve anything with Irulan?” she asked. 
“Only a fool would think that.” 
“I am not a fool, my love.” 
Anger  possessed  him.  “I’ve  never  said  you  were!  But  this  isn’t  some 
damned  romantic  novel  we’re  discussing.  That’s  a  real  princess  down  the 
hall. She was raised in all the nasty intrigues of an Imperial Court. Plotting is 
as natural to her as writing her stupid histories!” 
“They are not stupid, love.” 
“Probably not.” He brought his anger under control, took her hand in his. 
“Sorry. But that woman has many plots—plots within plots. Give in to one of 
her ambitions and you could advance another of them.” 
Her voice mild, Chani said: “Haven’t I always said as much?” 
“Yes, of course you have.” He stared at her. “Then what are you really 
trying to say to me?” 
She lay down beside him, placed her head against his neck. “They have 
come to a decision on how to ?ght you,” she said. “Irulan reeks of secret 
decisions.” 
Paul stroked her hair. 
Chani had peeled away the dross. 
Terrible  purpose  brushed  him.  It  was  a   coriolis   wind  in  his  soul.  It 
whistled  through  the  framework  of  his  being.  His  body  knew  things  then 
never learned in consciousness. 
“Chani, beloved,” he whispered, “do you know what I’d spend to end the 
Jihad—to separate myself from the damnable godhead the Qizarate forces 
onto me?” 
She trembled. “You have but to command it,” she said. 
“Oh, no. Even if I died now, my name would still lead them. When I think 
of the Atreides name tied to this religious butchery ….” 
“But you’re the Emperor! You’ve—” 
“I’m  a  ?gurehead.  When  godhead’s  given,  that’s  the  one  thing  the  so- 
called  god  no  longer  controls.”  A  bitter  laugh  shook  him.  He  sensed  the 
future looking back at him out of dynasties not even dreamed. He felt his 
being  cast  out,  crying,  unchained  from  the  rings  of  fate—only  his  name 
continued. “I was chosen,” he said. “Perhaps at birth … certainly before I had 
much say in it. I was chosen.” 
“Then un-choose,” she said. 
His arm tightened around her shoulder. “In time, beloved. Give me yet a 
little time.” 
Unshed tears burned his eyes. 
“We  should  return  to  Sietch  Tabr,”  Chani  said.  “There’s  too  much  to 
contend with in this tent of stone.” 
He nodded, his chin moving against the smooth fabric of the scarf which 
covered her hair. The soothing spice smell of her ?lled his nostrils. 
Sietch. The ancient Chakobsa word absorbed him: a place of retreat and 
safety in a time of peril. Chani’s suggestion made him long for vistas of open 
sand, for clean distances where one could see an enemy coming from a long 
way o?. 
“The tribes expect Muad’Dib to return to them,” she said. She lifted her 
head to look at him. “You belong to us.” 
“I belong to a vision,” he whispered. 
He thought then of the Jihad, of the gene mingling across parsecs and the 
vision which told him how he might end it. Should he pay the price? All the 
hatefulness would evaporate, dying as ?res die—ember by ember. But … oh! 
The terrifying price! 
I never wanted to be a god , he thought.  I wanted only to disappear like a 
jewel of trace dew caught by the morning. I wanted to escape the angels and the 
damned—alone … as though by an oversight . 
“Will we go back to the Sietch?” Chani pressed. 
“Yes,” he whispered. And he thought:  I must pay the price . 
Chani heaved a deep sigh, settled back against him. 
I’ve  loitered ,  he  thought.  And  he  saw  how  he’d  been  hemmed  in  by 
boundaries of love and the Jihad. And what was one life, no matter how 
beloved,  against  all  the  lives  the  Jihad  was  certain  to  take?  Could  single 
misery be weighed against the agony of multitudes? 
“Love?” Chani said, questioning. 
He put a hand against her lips. 
I’ll yield up myself , he thought.  I’ll rush out while I yet have the strength, ?y 
through a space a bird might not ?nd 
. It was a useless thought, and he knew it. 
The Jihad would follow his ghost. 
What could he answer? he wondered. How explain when people taxed 
him with brutal foolishsness? Who might understand? 
I  wanted  only  to  look  back  and  say:  “There!  There’s  an  existence  which 
couldn’t hold me. See! I vanish! No restraint or net of human devising can trap me 
ever again. I renounce my religion! This glorious instant is mine! I’m free!” 
What empty words! 
“A  big  worm  was  seen  below  the  Shield  Wall  yesterday,”  Chani  said. 
“More than a hundred meters long, they say. Such big ones come rarely into 
this region any more. The water repels them, I suppose. They say this one 
came  to  summon  Muad’Dib  home  to  his  desert.”  She  pinched  his  chest. 
“Don’t laugh at me!” 
“I’m not laughing.” 
Paul,  caught  by  wonder  at  the  persistent  Fremen  mythos,  felt  a  heart 
constriction, a thing in?icted upon his lifeline: 
 adab , the demanding memory. 
He recalled his childhood room on Caladan then … dark night in the stone 
chamber … a vision! It’d been one of his earliest prescient moments. He felt 
his mind dive into the vision, saw through a veiled cloud-memory (vision- 
within-vision) a line of Fremen, their robes trimmed with dust. They paraded 
past a gap in tall rocks. They carried a long, cloth-wrapped burden. 
And Paul heard himself say in the vision: “It was mostly sweet … but you 
were the sweetest of all ….” 
Adab released him. 
“You’re so quiet,” Chani whispered. “What is it?” 
Paul shuddered, sat up, face averted. 
“You’re angry because I’ve been to the desert’s edge,” Chani said. 
He shook his head without speaking. 
“I only went because I want a child,” Chani said. 
Paul was unable to speak. He felt himself consumed by the raw power of 
that early vision. Terrible purpose! In that moment, his whole life was a limb 
shaken by the departure of a bird … and the bird was  chance . Free will. 
I succumbed to the lure of the oracle , he thought. 
And he sensed that succumbing to this lure might be to ?x himself upon a 
single-track  life.  Could  it  be,  he  wondered,  that  the  oracle  didn’t 
  tell   the 
future? Could it be that the oracle 
 made  the future? Had he exposed his life 
to some web of underlying threads, trapped himself there in that long-ago 
awakening, victim of a spider-future which even now advanced upon him 
with terrifying jaws. 
A Bene Gesserit axiom slipped into his mind:  To use raw power is to make 
yourself in?nitely vulnerable to greater powers 
. 
“I know it angers you,” Chani said, touching his arm. “It’s true that the 
tribes have revived the old rites and the blood sacri?ces, but I took no part in 
those.” 
Paul  inhaled  a  deep,  trembling  breath.  The  torrent  of  his  vision 
dissipated, became a deep, still place whose currents moved with absorbing 
power beyond his reach. 
“Please,”  Chani  begged.  “I  want  a  child,  our  child.  Is  that  a  terrible 
thing?” 
Paul caressed her arm where she touched him, pulled away. He climbed 
from the bed, extinguished the glowglobes, crossed to the balcony window, 
opened the draperies. The deep desert could not intrude here except by its 
odors.  A  windowless  wall  climbed  to  the  night  sky  across  from  him. 
Moonlight slanted down into an enclosed garden, sentinel trees and broad 
leaves,  wet  foliage.  He  could  see  a  ?sh  pond  re?ecting  stars  among  the 
leaves, pockets of white ?oral brilliance in the shadows. Momentarily, he 
saw the garden through Fremen eyes: alien, menacing, dangerous in its waste 
of water. 
He  thought  of  the  Water  Sellers,  their  way  destroyed  by  the  lavish 
dispensing from his hands. They hated him. He’d slain the past. And there 
were others, even those who’d fought for the sols to buy precious water, who 
hated him for changing the old ways. As the ecological pattern dictated by 
Muad’Dib remade the planet’s landscape, human resistance increased. Was it 
not  presumptuous,  he  wondered,  to  think  he  could  make  over  an  entire 
planet—everything growing where and how he told it to grow? Even if he 
succeeded,  what  of  the  universe  waiting  out  there?  Did  it  fear  similar 
treatment? 
Abruptly,  he  closed  the  draperies,  sealed  the  ventilators.  He  turned 
toward Chani in the darkness, felt her waiting there. Her water rings tinkled 
like the almsbells of pilgrims. He groped his way to the sound, encountered 
her outstretched arms. 
“Beloved,” she whispered. “Have I troubled you?” 
Her arms enclosed his future as they enclosed him. 
“Not you,” he said. “Oh … not you.” 
The  advent  of  the  Field  Process  shield  and  the  lasgun  with  their  explosive 
interaction, deadly to attacker and attacked, placed the current determinatives 
on weapons technology. We need not go into the special role of atomics. The 
fact that any Family in my Empire could so deploy its atomics as to destroy the 
planetary bases of ?fty or more other Families causes some nervousness, true. 
But all of us possess precautionary plans for devastating retaliation. Guild and 
Landsraad contain the keys which hold this force in check. No, my concern goes 
to the development of humans as special weapons. Here is a virtually unlimited 
?eld which a few powers are developing 
. 
—Muad’Dib: Lecture to the War College from The Stilgar 
Chronicle 
The old man stood in his doorway peering out with blue-in-blue eyes. The 
eyes were veiled by that native suspicion all desert folk held for strangers. 
Bitter lines tortured the edges of his mouth where it could be seen through a 
fringe of white beard. He wore no stillsuit and it said much that he ignored 
this  fact  in  the  full  knowledge  of  the  moisture  pouring  from  his  house 
through the open door. 
Scytale bowed, gave the greeting signal of the conspiracy. 
From somewhere behind the old man came the sound of a rebec wailing 
through  the  atonal  dissonance  of 
  semuta   music.  The  old  man’s  manner 
carried  no  drug  dullness,  an  indication  that  semuta  was  the  weakness  of 
another. It seemed strange to Scytale, though, to ?nd that sophisticated vice 
in this place. 
“Greetings from afar,” Scytale said, smiling through the ?at-featured face 
he had chosen for this encounter. It occurred to him, then, that this old man 
might recognize the chosen face. Some of the older Fremen here on Dune had 
known Duncan Idaho. 
The choice of features, which he had thought amusing, might have been a 
mistake, Scytale decided. But he dared not change the face out here. He cast 
nervous glances up and down the street. Would the old man never invite him 
inside? 
“Did you know my son?” the old man asked. 
That,  at  least,  was  one  of  the  countersigns.  Scytale  made  the  proper 
response, all the time keeping his eyes alert for any suspicious circumstance 
in his surroundings. He did not like his position here. The street was a cul-de- 
sac ending in this house. The houses all around had been built for veterans of 
the  Jihad.  They  formed  a  suburb  of  Arrakeen  which  stretched  into  the 
Imperial Basin past Tiemag. The walls which hemmed in this street presented 
blank faces of dun plasmeld broken by dark shadows of sealed doorways and, 
here  and  there,  scrawled  obscenities.  Beside  this  very  door  someone  had 
chalked  a  pronouncement  that  one  Beris  had  brought  back  to  Arrakis  a 
loathsome disease which deprived him of his manhood. 
“Do you come in partnership,” the old man asked. 
“Alone,” Scytale said. 
The old man cleared his throat, still hesitating in that maddening way. 
Scytale cautioned himself to patience. Contact in this fashion carried its 
own dangers. Perhaps the old man knew some reason for carrying on this 
way.  It  was  the  proper  hour,  though.  The  pale  sun  stood  almost  directly 
overhead.  People  of  this  quarter  remained  sealed  in  their  houses  to  sleep 
through the hot part of the day. 
Was it the new neighbor who bothered the old man? Scytale wondered. 
The adjoining house, he knew, had been assigned to Otheym, once a member 
of Muad’Dib’s dreaded Fedaykin death commandos. And Bijaz, the catalyst- 
dwarf, waited with Otheym. 
Scytale returned his gaze to the old man, noted the empty sleeve dangling 
from the left shoulder and the lack of a stillsuit. An air of command hung 
about this old man. He’d been no foot slogger in the Jihad. 
“May I know the visitor’s name?” the old man asked. 
Scytale suppressed a sigh of relief. He was to be accepted, after all. “I am 
Zaal,” he said, giving the name assigned him for this mission. 
“I am Farok,” the old man said, “once Bashar of the Ninth Legion in the 
Jihad. Does this mean anything to you?” 
Scytale read menace in the words, said: “You were born in Sietch Tabr 
with allegiance to Stilgar.” 
Farok relaxed, stepped aside. “You are welcome in my house.” 
Scytale slipped past him into a shadowy atrium—blue tile ?oor, glittering 
designs worked in crystal on the walls. Beyond the atrium was a covered 
courtyard.  Light  admitted  by  translucent  ?lters  spread  an  opalescence  as 
silvery  as  the  white-night  of  First  Moon.  The  street  door  grated  into  its 
moisture seals behind him. 
“We  were  a  noble  people,”  Farok  said,  leading  the  way  toward  the 
courtyard. “We were not of the cast-out. We lived in no 
 graben  village … 
such as this! We had a proper sietch in the Shield Wall above Habbanya 
Ridge. One worm could carry us into Kedem, the inner desert.” 
“Not  like  this,”  Scytale  agreed,  realizing  now  what  had  brought  Farok 
into the conspiracy. The Fremen longed for the old days and the old ways. 
They entered the courtyard. 
Farok struggled with an intense dislike for his visitor, Scytale realized. 
Fremen distrusted eyes that were not the total blue of the Ibad. O?worlders, 
Fremen said, had unfocused eyes which saw things they were not supposed 
to see. 
The semuta music had stopped at their entrance. It was replaced now by 
the strum of a baliset, ?rst a nine-scale chord, then the clear notes of a song 
which was popular on the Naraj worlds. 
As his eyes adjusted to the light, Scytale saw a youth sitting cross-legged 
on a low divan beneath arches to his right. The youth’s eyes were empty 
sockets.  With  that  uncanny  facility  of  the  blind,  he  began  singing  the 
moment Scytale focused on him. The voice was high and sweet: 
“A wind has blown the land away 
And blown the sky away 
And all the men! 
Who is this wind? 
The trees stand unbent, 
Drinking where men drank. 
I’ve known too many worlds, 
Too many men, 
Too many trees, 
Too many winds.” 
Those were not the original words of the song, Scytale noted. Farok led 
him  away  from  the  youth  and  under  the  arches  on  the  opposite  side, 
indicated  cushions  scattered  over  the  tile  ?oor.  The  tile  was  worked  into 
designs of sea creatures. 
“There is a cushion once occupied in sietch by Muad’Dib,” Farok said, 
indicating a round, black mound. “It is yours now.” 
“I am in your debt,” Scytale said, sinking to the black mound. He smiled. 
Farok  displayed  wisdom.  A  sage  spoke  of  loyalty  even  while  listening  to 
songs of hidden meaning and words with secret messages. Who could deny 
the terrifying powers of the tyrant Emperor? 
Inserting his words across the song without breaking the meter, Farok 
said: “Does my son’s music disturb you?” 
Scytale  gestured  to  a  cushion  facing  him,  put  his  back  against  a  cool 
pillar. “I enjoy music.” 
“My  son  lost  his  eyes  in  the  conquest  of  Naraj,”  Farok  said.  “He  was 
nursed there and should have stayed. No woman of the People will have him 
thus. I ?nd it curious, though, to know I have grandchildren on Naraj that I 
may never see. Do you know the Naraj worlds, Zaal?” 
“In my youth, I toured there with a troupe of my fellow Face Dancers,” 
Scytale said. 
“You  are  a  Face  Dancer,  then,”  Farok  said.  “I  had  wondered  at  your 
features. They reminded me of a man I knew here once.” 
“Duncan Idaho?” 
“That one, yes. A swordmaster in the Emperor’s pay.” 
“He was killed, so it is said.” 
“So  it  is  said,”  Farok  agreed.  “Are  you  truly  a  man,  then?  I’ve  heard 
stories about Face Dancers that….” He shrugged. 
“We are Jadacha hermaphrodites,” Scytale said, “either sex at will. For 
the present, I am a man.” 
Farok pursed his lips in thought, then: “May I call for refreshments? Do 
you desire water? Iced fruit?” 
“Talk will su?ce,” Scytale said. 
“The  guest’s  wish  is  a  command,”  Farok  said,  settling  to  the  cushion 
which faced Scytale. 
“Blessed is Abu d’ Dhur, Father of the Inde?nite Roads of Time,” Scytale 
said. And he thought: 
 There! I’ve told him straight out that I come from a Guild 
Steersman and wear the Steersman’s concealment 
. 
“Thrice blessed,” Farok said, folding his hands into his lap in the ritual 
clasp. They were old, heavily veined hands. 
“An object seen from a distance betrays only its principle,” Scytale said, 
revealing that he wished to discuss the Emperor’s fortress Keep. 
“That which is dark and evil may be seen for evil at any distance,” Farok 
said, advising delay. 
Why?  Scytale wondered. But he said: “How did your son lose his eyes?” 
“The Naraj defenders used a stone burner,” Farok said. “My son was too 
close. Cursed atomics! Even the stone burner should be outlawed.” 
“It skirts the intent of the law,” Scytale agreed. And he thought:  A stone 
burner on Naraj! We weren’t told of that. Why does this old man speak of stone 
burners here? 
“I o?ered to buy Tleilaxu eyes for him from your master,” Farok said. 
“But there’s a story in the legions that Tleilaxu eyes enslave their users. My 
son told me that such eyes are metal and he is ?esh, that such a union must 
be sinful.” 
“The  principle  of  an  object  must  ?t  its  original  intent,”  Scytale  said, 
trying to turn the conversation back to the information he sought. 
Farok’s lips went thin, but he nodded. “Speak openly of what you wish,” 
he said. “We must put our trust in your Steersman.” 
“Have you ever entered the Imperial Keep?” Scytale asked. 
“I was there for the feast celebrating the Molitor victory. It was cold in all 
that stone despite the best Ixian space heaters. We slept on the terrace of 
Alia’s Fane the night before. He has trees in there, you know—trees from 
many worlds. We Bashars were dressed in our ?nest green robes and had our 
table set apart. We ate and drank too much. I was disgusted with some of the 
things  I  saw.  The  walking  wounded  came,  dragging  themselves  along  on 
their crutches. I do not think our Muad’Dib knows how many men he has 
maimed.” 
“You objected to the feast?” Scytale asked, speaking from a knowledge of 
the Fremen orgies which were ignited by spice-beer. 
“It  was  not  like  the  mingling  of  our  souls  in  the  sietch,”  Farok  said. 
“There was no tau. For entertainment, the troops had slave girls, and the men 
shared the stories of their battles and their wounds.” 
“So you were inside that great pile of stone,” Scytale said. 
“Muad’Dib came out to us on the terrace,” Farok said. “‘Good fortune to 
us all,’ he said. The greeting drill of the desert in that place!” 
“Do you know the location of his private apartments?” Scytale asked. 
“Deep  inside,”  Farok  said.  “Somewhere  deep  inside.  I  am  told  he  and 
Chani live a nomadic life and that all within the walls of their Keep. Out to 
the Great Hall he comes for the public audiences. He has reception halls and 
formal meeting places, a whole wing for his personal guard, places for the 
ceremonies and an inner section for communications. There is a room far 
beneath his fortress, I am told, where he keeps a stunted worm surrounded 
by a water moat with which to poison it. Here is where he reads the future.” 
Myth all tangled up with facts , Scytale thought. 
“The  apparatus  of  government  accompanies  him  everywhere,”  Farok 
grumbled. “Clerks and attendants and attendants for the attendants. He trusts 
only the ones such as Stilgar who were very close to him in the old days.” 
“Not you,” Scytale said. 
“I think he has forgotten my existence,” Farok said. 
“How does he come and go when he leaves that building?” Scytale asked. 
“He has a tiny ’thopter landing which juts from an inner wall,” Farok 
said. “I am told Muad’Dib will not permit another to handle the controls for a 
landing  there.  It  requires  an  approach,  so  it  is  said,  where  the  slightest 
miscalculation would plunge him down a sheer cli? of wall into one of his 
accursed gardens.” 
Scytale nodded. This, most likely, was true. Such an aerial entry to the 
Emperor’s quarters would carry a certain measure of security. The Atreides 
were superb pilots all. 
“He uses men to carry his  distrans  messages,” Farok said. “It demeans men 
to implant wave translators in them. A man’s voice should be his own to 
command.  It  should  not  carry  another  man’s  message  hidden  within  its 
sounds.” 
Scytale  shrugged.  All  great  powers  used  the  distrans  in  this  age.  One 
could  never  tell  what  obstacle  might  be  placed  between  sender  and 
addressee. The distrans de?ed political cryptology because it relied on subtle 
distortions  of  natural  sound  patterns  which  could  be  scrambled  with 
enormous intricacy. 
“Even his tax o?cials use this method,” Farok complained. “In my day, 
the distrans was implanted only in the lower animals.” 
But revenue information must be kept secret , Scytale thought.  More than one 
government has fallen because people discovered the real extent of o?cial wealth 
. 
“How do the Fremen cohorts feel now about Muad’Dib’s Jihad?” Scytale 
asked. “Do they object to making a god out of their Emperor?” 
“Most of them don’t even consider this,” Farok said. “They think of the 
Jihad  the  way  I  thought  of  it—most  of  them.  It  is  a  source  of  strange 
experiences, adventure, wealth. This graben hovel in which I live”—Farok 
gestured at the courtyard—“it cost sixty lidas of spice. Ninety kontars! There 
was a time when I could not even imagine such riches.” He shook his head. 
Across the courtyard, the blind youth took up the notes of a love ballad 
on his baliset. 
Ninety kontars , Scytale thought.  How strange. Great riches, certainly. Farok’s 
hovel would be a palace on many another world, but all things were relative— 
even the kontar. Did Farok, for example, know whence came his measure for this 
weight of spice? Did he ever think to himself that one and a half kontar once 
limited a camel load? Not likely. Farok might never even have heard of a camel or 
of the Golden Age of Earth 
. 
His words oddly in rhythm to the melody of his son’s baliset, Farok said: 
“I owned a crysknife, water rings to ten liters, my own lance which had been 
my  father’s,  a  co?ee  service,  a  bottle  made  of  red  glass  older  than  any 
memory in my sietch. I had my own share of our spice, but no money. I was 
rich and did not know it. Two wives I had: one plain and dear to me, the 
other  stupid  and  obstinate,  but  with  form  and  face  of  an  angel.  I  was  a 
Fremen Naib, a rider of worms, master of the leviathan and of the sand.” 
The youth across the courtyard picked up the beat of his melody. 
“I knew many things without the need to think about them,” Farok said. 
“I knew there was water far beneath our sand, held there in bondage by the 
Little Makers. I knew that my ancestors sacri?ced virgins to Shai-hulud … 
before Liet-Kynes made us stop. It was wrong of us to stop. I had seen the 
jewels in the mouth of a worm. My soul had four gates and I knew them all.” 
He fell silent, musing. 
“Then the Atreides came with his witch mother,” Scytale said. 
“The  Atreides  came,”  Farok  agreed.  “The  one  we  named  Usul  in  our 
sietch, his private name among us. Our Muad’Dib, our Mahdi! And when he 
called for the Jihad, I was one of those who asked: ‘Why should I go to ?ght 
there? I have no relatives there.’ But other men went—young men, friends, 
companions of my childhood. When they returned, they spoke of wizardry, of 
the power in this Atreides 
 savior . He fought our enemy, the Harkonnen. Liet- 
Kynes, who had promised us a paradise upon our planet, blessed him. It was 
said this Atreides came to change our world and our universe, that he was 
the man to make the golden ?ower blossom in the night.” 
Farok held up his hands, examined the palms. “Men pointed to First Moon 
and  said:  ‘His  soul  is  there.’  Thus,  he  was  called  Muad’Dib.  I  did  not 
understand all this.” 
He lowered his hands, stared across the courtyard at his son. “I had no 
thoughts in my head. There were thoughts only in my heart and my belly 
and my loins.” 
Again, the tempo of the background music increased. 
“Do you know why I enlisted in the Jihad?” The old eyes stared hard at 
Scytale. “I heard there was a thing called a sea. It is very hard to believe in a 
sea when you have lived only here among our dunes. We have no seas. Men 
of Dune had never known a sea. We had our wind-traps. We collected water 
for the great change Liet-Kynes promised us … this great change Muad’Dib is 
bringing with a wave of his hand. I could imagine a 
 qanat , water ?owing 
across the land in a canal. From this, my mind could picture a river. But a 
sea?” 
Farok gazed at the translucent cover of his courtyard as though trying to 
probe into the universe beyond. “A sea,” he said, voice low. “It was too much 
for my mind to picture. Yet, men I knew said they had seen this marvel. I 
thought they lied, but I had to know for myself. It was for this reason that I 
enlisted.” 
The youth struck a loud ?nal chord on the baliset, took up a new song 
with an oddly undulating rhythm. 
“Did you ?nd your sea?” Scytale asked. 
Farok remained silent and Scytale thought the old man had not heard. 
The baliset music rose around them and fell like a tidal movement. Farok 
breathed to its rhythm. 
“There was a sunset,” Farok said presently. “One of the elder artists might 
have painted such a sunset. It had red in it the color of the glass in my bottle. 
There was gold … blue. It was on the world they call Enfeil, the one where I 
led my legion to victory. We came out of a mountain pass where the air was 
sick with water. I could scarcely breathe it. And there below me was the 
thing my friends had told me about: water as far as I could see and farther. 
We marched down to it. I waded out into it and drank. It was bitter and 
made me ill. But the wonder of it has never left me.” 
Scytale found himself sharing the old Fremen’s awe. 
“I immersed myself in that sea,” Farok said, looking down at the water 
creatures  worked  into  the  tiles  of  his  ?oor.  “One  man  sank  beneath  that 
water … another man arose from it. I felt that I could remember a past which 
had never been. I stared around me with eyes which could accept anything 
… anything at all. I saw a body in the water—one of the defenders we had 
slain. There was a log nearby supported on that water, a piece of a great tree. 
I can close my eyes now and see that log. It was black on one end from a ?re. 
And there was a piece of cloth in that water—no more than a yellow rag … 
torn, dirty. I looked at all these things and I understood why they had come 
to this place. It was for me to see them.” 
Farok  turned  slowly,  stared  into  Scytale’s  eyes.  “The  universe  is 
un?nished, you know,” he said. 
This one is garrulous, but deep , Scytale thought. And he said: “I can see it 
made a profound impression on you.” 
“You are a Tleilaxu,” Farok said. “You have seen many seas. I have seen 
only this one, yet I know a thing about seas which you do not.” 
Scytale found himself in the grip of an odd feeling of disquiet. 
“The Mother of Chaos was born in a sea,” Farok said. “A Qizara Tafwid 
stood nearby when I came dripping from that water. He had not entered the 
sea. He stood on the sand … it was wet sand … with some of my men who 
shared his fear. He watched me with eyes that knew I had learned something 
which was denied to him. I had become a sea creature and I frightened him. 
The sea healed me of the Jihad and I think he saw this.” 
Scytale realized that somewhere in this recital the music had stopped. He 
found it disturbing that he could not place the instant when the baliset had 
fallen silent. 
As  though  it  were  relevant  to  what  he’d  been  recounting,  Farok  said: 
“Every gate is guarded. There’s no way into the Emperor’s fortress.” 
“That’s its weakness,” Scytale said. 
Farok stretched his neck upward, peering. 
“There’s  a  way  in,”  Scytale  explained.  “The  fact  that  most  men— 
including,  we  may  hope,  the  Emperor—believe  otherwise  …  that’s  to  our 
advantage.” He rubbed his lips, feeling the strangeness of the visage he’d 
chosen. The musician’s silence bothered him. Did it mean Farok’s son was 
through transmitting? That had been the way of it, naturally: the message 
condensed and transmitted within the music. It had been impressed upon 
Scytale’s own neural system, there to be triggered at the proper moment by 
the distrans embedded in his adrenal cortex. If it was ended, he had become 
a container of unknown words. He was a vessel sloshing with data: every cell 
of the conspiracy here on Arrakis, every name, every contact phrase—all the 
vital information. 
With  this  information,  they  could  brave  Arrakis,  capture  a  sandworm, 
begin the culture of melange somewhere beyond Muad’Dib’s writ. They could 
break the monopoly as they broke Muad’Dib. They could do many things 
with this information. 
“We have the woman here,” Farok said. “Do you wish to see her now?” 
“I’ve seen her,” Scytale said. “I’ve studied her with care. Where is she?” 
Farok snapped his ?ngers. 
The  youth  took  up  his  rebec,  drew  the  bow  across  it.  Semuta  music 
wailed from the strings. As though drawn by the sound, a young woman in a 
blue robe emerged from a doorway behind the musician. Narcotic dullness 
?lled her eyes which were the total blue of the Ibad. She was a Fremen, 
addicted to the spice, and now caught by an o?world vice. Her awareness lay 
deep within the semuta, lost somewhere and riding the ecstasy of the music. 
“Otheym’s daughter,” Farok said. “My son gave her the narcotic in the 
hope of winning a woman of the People for himself despite his blindness. As 
you can see, his victory is empty. Semuta has taken what he hoped to gain.” 
“Her father doesn’t know?” Scytale asked. 
“She doesn’t even know,” Farok said. “My son supplies false memories 
with which she accounts to herself for her visits. She thinks herself in love 
with him. This is what her family believes. They are outraged because he is 
not a complete man, but they won’t interfere, of course.” 
The music trailed away to silence. 
At a gesture from the musician, the young woman seated herself beside 
him, bent close to listen as he murmured to her. 
“What will you do with her?” Farok asked. 
Once more, Scytale studied the courtyard. “Who else is in this house?” he 
asked. 
“We are all here now,” Farok said. “You’ve not told me what you’ll do 
with the woman. It is my son who wishes to know.” 
As  though  about  to  answer,  Scytale  extended  his  right  arm.  From  the 
sleeve  of  his  robe,  a  glistening  needle  darted,  embedded  itself  in  Farok’s 
neck. There was no outcry, no change of posture. Farok would be dead in a 
minute, but he sat unmoving, frozen by the dart’s poison. 
Slowly, Scytale climbed to his feet, crossed to the blind musician. The 
youth was still murmuring to the young woman when the dart whipped into 
him. 
Scytale took the young woman’s arm, urged her gently to her feet, shifted 
his own appearance before she looked at him. She came erect, focused on 
him. 
“What is it, Farok?” she asked. 
“My son is tired and must rest,” Scytale said. “Come. We’ll go out the 
back way.” 
“We had such a nice talk,” she said. “I think I’ve convinced him to get 
Tleilaxu eyes. It’d make a man of him again.” 
“Haven’t  I  said  it  many  times?”  Scytale  asked,  urging  her  into  a  rear 
chamber. 
His  voice,  he  noted  with  pride,  matched  his  features  precisely.  It 
unmistakably was the voice of the old Fremen, who certainly was dead by 
this time. 
Scytale sighed. It had been done with sympathy, he told himself, and the 
victims certainly had known their peril. Now, the young woman would have 
to be given her chance. 
Empires do not su?er emptiness of purpose at the time of their creation. It is 
when they have become established that aims are lost and replaced by vague 
ritual 
. 
—Words of Muad’Dib by Princess Irulan 
It was going to be a bad session, this meeting of the Imperial Council, Alia 
realized. She sensed contention gathering force, storing up energy—the way 
Irulan  refused  to  look  at  Chani,  Stilgar’s  nervous  shu?ing  of  papers,  the 
scowls Paul directed at Korba the Qizara. 
She seated herself at the end of the golden council table so she could look 
out the balcony windows at the dusty light of the afternoon. 
Korba, interrupted by her entrance, went on with something he’d been 
saying to Paul. “What I mean, m’Lord, is that there aren’t as many gods as 
once there were.” 
Alia laughed, throwing her head back. The movement dropped the black 
hood of her aba robe. Her features lay exposed—blue-in-blue “spice eyes,” 
her mother’s oval face beneath a cap of bronze hair, small nose, mouth wide 
and generous. 
Korba’s cheeks went almost the color of his orange robe. He glared at 
Alia, an angry gnome, bald and fuming. 
“Do you know what’s being said about your brother?” he demanded. 
“I know what’s being said about your Qizarate,” Alia countered. “You’re 
not divines, you’re god’s spies.” 
Korba  glanced  at  Paul  for  support,  said:  “We  are  sent  by  the  writ  of 
Muad’Dib, that He shall know the truth of His people and they shall know 
the truth of Him.” 
“Spies,” Alia said. 
Korba pursed his lips in injured silence. 
Paul looked at his sister, wondering why she provoked Korba. Abruptly, 
he saw that Alia had passed into womanhood, beautiful with the ?rst blazing 
innocence of youth. He found himself surprised that he hadn’t noticed it until 
this moment. She was ?fteen—almost sixteen, a Reverend Mother without 
motherhood, virgin priestess, object of fearful veneration for the superstitious 
masses—Alia of the Knife. 
“This is not the time or place for your sister’s levity,” Irulan said. 
Paul ignored her, nodded to Korba. “The square’s full of pilgrims. Go out 
and lead their prayer.” 
“But they expect  you , m’Lord,” Korba said. 
“Put on your turban,” Paul said. “They’ll never know at this distance.” 
Irulan smothered irritation at being ignored, watched Korba arise to obey. 
She’d had the the sudden disquieting thought that Edric might not hide her 
actions from Alia. 
 What do we really know of the sister?  she wondered. 
Chani, hands tightly clasped in her lap, glanced across the table at Stilgar, 
her uncle, Paul’s Minister of State. Did the old Fremen Naib ever long for the 
simpler life of his desert sietch? she wondered. Stilgar’s black hair, she noted, 
had begun to gray at the edges, but his eyes beneath heavy brows remained 
far-seeing. It was the eagle stare of the wild, and his beard still carried the 
catchtube indentation of life in a stillsuit. 
Made  nervous  by  Chani’s  attention,  Stilgar  looked  around  the  Council 
Chamber. His gaze fell on the balcony window and Korba standing outside. 
Korba  raised  outstretched  arms  for  the  benediction  and  a  trick  of  the 
afternoon sun cast a red halo onto the window behind him. For a moment, 
Stilgar saw the Court Qizara as a ?gure cruci?ed on a ?ery wheel. Korba 
lowered his arms, destroyed the illusion, but Stilgar remained shaken by it. 
His thoughts went in angry frustration to the fawning supplicants waiting in 
the Audience Hall, and to the hateful pomp which surrounded Muad’Dib’s 
throne. 
Convening  with  the  Emperor,  one  hoped  for  a  fault  in  him,  to  ?nd 
mistakes,  Stilgar  thought.  He  felt  this  might  be  sacrilege,  but  wanted  it 
anyway. 
Distant crowd murmuring entered the chamber as Korba returned. The 
balcony door thumped into its seals behind him, shutting o? the sound. 
Paul’s gaze followed the Qizara. Korba took his seat at Paul’s left, dark 
features composed, eyes glazed by fanaticism. He’d enjoyed that moment of 
religious power. 
“The spirit presence has been invoked,” he said. 
“Thank the lord for that,” Alia said. 
Korba’s lips went white. 
Again, Paul studied his sister, wondered at her motives. Her innocence 
masked deception, he told himself. She’d come out of the same Bene Gesserit 
breeding  program  as  he  had.  What  had  the  Kwisatz  Haderach  genetics 
produced in her? There was always that mysterious di?erence: she’d been an 
embryo in the womb when her mother had survived the raw melange poison. 
Mother and unborn daughter had become Reverend Mothers simultaneously. 
But simultaneity didn’t carry identity. 
Of  the  experience,  Alia  said  that  in  one  terrifying  instant  she  had 
awakened to consciousness, her memory absorbing the uncounted other-lives 
which her mother was assimilating. 
“I  became  my  mother  and  all  the  others,”  she  said.  “I  was  unformed, 
unborn, but I became an old woman then and there.” 
Sensing his thoughts on her, Alia smiled at Paul. His expression softened. 
How  could  anyone  react  to  Korba  with  other  than  cynical  humor?   he  asked 
himself. 
 What is more ridiculous than a Death Commando transformed into a 
priest? 
Stilgar  tapped  his  papers.  “If  my  liege  permits,”  he  said.  “These  are 
matters urgent and dire.” 
“The Tupile Treaty?” Paul asked. 
“The Guild maintains that we must sign this treaty without knowing the 
precise location of the Tupile Entente,” Stilgar said. “They’ve some support 
from Landsraad delegates.” 
“What pressures have you brought to bear?” Irulan asked. 
“Those pressures which my Emperor has designated for this enterprise,” 
Stilgar said. The sti? formality of his reply contained all his disapproval of 
the Princess Consort. 
“My  Lord  and  husband,”  Irulan  said,  turning  to  Paul,  forcing  him  to 
acknowledge her. 
Emphasizing  the  titular  di?erence  in  front  of  Chani ,  Paul  thought,   is  a 
weakness 
.  In  such  moments,  he  shared  Stilgar’s  dislike  for  Irulan,  but 
sympathy  tempered  his  emotions.  What  was  Irulan  but  a  Bene  Gesserit 
pawn? 
“Yes?” Paul said. 
Irulan stared at him. “If you withheld their melange ….” 
Chani shook her head in dissent. 
“We  tread  with  caution,”  Paul  said.  “Tupile  remains  the  place  of 
sanctuary for defeated Great Houses. It symbolizes a last resort, a ?nal place 
of safety for all our subjects. Exposing the sanctuary makes it vulnerable.” 
“If they can hide people they can hide other things,” Stilgar rumbled. “An 
army, perhaps, or the beginnings of melange culture which—” 
“You don’t back people into a corner,” Alia said. “Not if you want them to 
remain  peaceful.”  Ruefully,  she  saw  that  she’d  been  drawn  into  the 
contention which she’d foreseen. 
“So we’ve spent ten years negotiating for nothing,” Irulan said. 
“None of my brother’s actions is for nothing,” Alia said. 
Irulan picked up a scribe, gripped it with white-knuckled intensity. Paul 
saw her marshal emotional control in the Bene Gesserit way: the penetrating 
inward stare, deep breathing. He could almost hear her repeating the litany. 
Presently, she said: “What have we gained?” 
“We’ve kept the Guild o? balance,” Chani said. 
“We want to avoid a showdown confrontation with our enemies,” Alia 
said. “We have no special desire to kill them. There’s enough butchery going 
on under the Atreides banner.” 
She  feels  it,  too ,  Paul  thought.  Strange,  what  a  sense  of  compelling 
responsibility they both felt for that brawling, idolatrous universe with its 
ecstasies of tranquility and wild motion.  Must we protect them from themselves? 
he  wondered.   They  play  with  nothingness  every  moment—empty  lives,  empty 
words. They ask too much of me 
. His throat felt tight and full. How many 
moments would he lose? What sons? What dreams? Was it worth the price 
his vision had revealed? Who would ask the living of some far distant future, 
who would say to them: “But for Muad’Dib, you would not be here.” 
“Denying them their melange would solve nothing,” Chani said. “So the 
Guild’s navigators would lose their ability to see into timespace. Your Sisters 
of  the  Bene  Gesserit  would  lose  their  truthsense.  Some  people  might  die 
before  their  time.  Communication  would  break  down.  Who  could  be 
blamed?” 
“They wouldn’t let it come to that,” Irulan said. 
“Wouldn’t they?” Chani asked. “Why not? Who could blame the Guild? 
They’d be helpless, demonstrably so.” 
“We’ll sign the treaty as it stands,” Paul said. 
“M’Lord,” Stilgar said, concentrating on his hands, “there is a question in 
our minds.” 
“Yes?” Paul gave the old Fremen his full attention. 
“You  have  certain  …  powers,”  Stilgar  said.  “Can  you  not  locate  the 
Entente despite the Guild?” 
Powers!  Paul thought. Stilgar couldn’t just say:  “You’re prescient. Can’t you 
trace a path in the future that leads to Tupile?” 
Paul looked at the golden surface of the table. Always the same problem: 
How could he express the limits of the inexpressible? Should he speak of 
fragmentation, the natural destiny of all power? How could someone who’d 
never  experienced  the  spice  change  of  prescience  conceive  an  awareness 
containing no localized spacetime, no personal image-vector nor associated 
sensory captives? 
He  looked  at  Alia,  found  her  attention  on  Irulan.  Alia  sensed  his 
movement, glanced at him, nodded toward Irulan. Ahhh, yes: any answer 
they gave would ?nd its way into one of Irulan’s special reports to the Bene 
Gesserit. They never gave up seeking an answer to their Kwisatz Haderach. 
Stilgar, though, deserved an answer of some kind. For that matter, so did 
Irulan. 
“The uninitiated try to conceive of prescience as obeying a  Natural Law ,” 
Paul said. He steepled his hands in front of him. “But it’d be just as correct to 
say  it’s  heaven  speaking  to  us,  that  being  able  to  read  the  future  is  a 
harmonious  act  of  man’s  being.  In  other  words,  prediction  is  a  natural 
consequence in the wave of the present. It wears the guise of nature, you see. 
But such powers cannot be used from an attitude that prestates aims and 
purposes. Does a chip caught in a wave say where it’s going? There’s no 
cause and e?ect in the oracle. Causes become occasions or convections and 
con?uences, places where the currents meet. Accepting prescience, you ?ll 
your  being  with  concepts  repugnant  to  the  intellect.  Your  intellectual 
consciousness, therefore, rejects them. In rejecting, intellect becomes a part 
of the processes, and is subjugated.” 
“You cannot do it?” Stilgar asked. 
“Were I to seek Tupile with prescience,” Paul said, speaking directly to 
Irulan, “this might hide Tupile.” 
“Chaos!” Irulan protested. “It has no … no … consistency.” 
“I did say it obeys no Natural Law,” Paul said. 
“Then there are limits to what you can see or do with your powers?” 
Irulan asked. 
Before  Paul  could  answer,  Alia  said:  “Dear  Irulan,  prescience  has  no 
limits. Not consistent? Consistency isn’t a necessary aspect of the universe.” 
“But he said …” 
“How can my brother give you explicit information about the limits of 
something which has no limits? The boundaries escape the intellect.” 
That was a nasty thing for Alia to do , Paul thought. It would alarm Irulan, 
who  had  such  a  careful  consciousness,  so  dependent  upon  values  derived 
from precise limits. His gaze went to Korba, who sat in a pose of religious 
reverie— 
listening with the soul . How could the Qizarate use this exchange? 
More religious mystery? Something to evoke awe? No doubt. 
“Then you’ll sign the treaty in its present form?” Stilgar asked. 
Paul  smiled.  The  issue  of  the  oracle,  by  Stilgar’s  judgment,  had  been 
closed. Stilgar aimed only at victory, not at discovering truth. Peace, justice 
and  a  sound  coinage—these  anchored  Stilgar’s  universe.  He  wanted 
something visible and real—a signature on a treaty. 
“I’ll sign it,” Paul said. 
Stilgar took up a fresh folder. “The latest communication from our ?eld 
commanders in Sector Ixian speaks of agitation for a constitution.” The old 
Fremen glanced at Chani, who shrugged. 
Irulan, who had closed her eyes and put both hands to her forehead in 
mnemonic impressment, opened her eyes, studied Paul intently. 
“The  Ixian  Confederacy  o?ers  submission,”  Stilgar  said,  “but  their 
negotiators question the amount of the Imperial Tax which they—” 
“They want a legal limit to my Imperial will,” Paul said. “Who would 
govern me, the Landsraad or CHOAM?” 
Stilgar  removed  from  the  folder  a  note  on   instroy   paper.  “One  of  our 
agents sent this memorandum from a caucus of the CHOAM minority.” He 
read the cipher in a ?at voice: “The Throne must be stopped in its attempt at 
a  power  monopoly.  We  must  tell  the  truth  about  the  Atreides,  how  he 
maneuvers behind the triple sham of Landsraad legislation, religious sanction 
and bureaucratic e?ciency.” He pushed the note back into the folder. 
“A constitution,” Chani murmured. 
Paul glanced at her, back to Stilgar.  Thus the Jihad falters , Paul thought, 
but not soon enough to save me . The thought produced emotional tensions. He 
remembered his earliest visions of the Jihad-to-be, the terror and revulsion 
he’d experienced. Now, of course, he knew visions of greater terrors. He had 
lived with the real violence. He had seen his Fremen, charged with mystical 
strength, sweep all before them in the religious war. The Jihad gained a new 
perspective. It was ?nite, of course, a brief spasm when measured against 
eternity, but beyond lay horrors to overshadow anything in the past. 
All in my name , Paul thought. 
“Perhaps they could be given the  form  of a constitution,” Chani suggested. 
“It needn’t be actual.” 
“Deceit  a tool of statecraft,” Irulan agreed.  is 
“There are limits to power, as those who put their hopes in a constitution 
always discover,” Paul said. 
Korba straightened from his reverent pose. “M’Lord?” 
“Yes?”  And  Paul  thought,   Here  now!  Here’s  one  who  may  harbor  secret 
sympathies for an imagined rule of Law 
. 
“We could begin with a religious constitution,” Korba said, “something 
for the faithful who—” 
“No!” Paul snapped. “We will make this an Order in Council. Are you 
recording this, Irulan?” 
“Yes, m’Lord,” Irulan said, voice frigid with dislike for the menial role he 
forced upon her. 
“Constitutions  become  the  ultimate  tyranny,”  Paul  said.  “They’re 
organized power on such a scale as to be overwhelming. The constitution is 
social power mobilized and it has no conscience. It can crush the highest and 
the lowest, removing all dignity and individuality. It has an unstable balance 
point  and  no  limitations.  I,  however,  have  limitations.  In  my  desire  to 
provide an ultimate protection for my people, I forbid a constitution. Order 
in Council, this date, etcetera, etcetera.” 
“What of the Ixian concern about the tax, m’Lord?” Stilgar asked. 
Paul forced his attention away from the brooding, angry look on Korba’s 
face, said: “You’ve a proposal, Stil?” 
“We must have control of taxes, Sire.” 
“Our price to the Guild for my signature on the Tupile Treaty,” Paul said, 
“is  the  submission  of  the  Ixian  Confederacy  to  our  tax.  The  Confederacy 
cannot trade without Guild transport. They’ll pay.” 
“Very good, m’Lord.” Stilgar produced another folder, cleared his throat. 
“The Qizarate’s report on Salusa Secundus. Irulan’s father has been putting 
his legions through landing maneuvers.” 
Irulan found something of interest in the palm of her left hand. A pulse 
throbbed at her neck. 
“Irulan,” Paul asked, “do you persist in arguing that your father’s one 
legion is nothing more than a toy?” 
“What could he do with only one legion?” she asked. She stared at him 
out of slitted eyes. 
“He could get himself killed,” Chani said. 
Paul nodded. “And I’d be blamed.” 
“I know a few commanders in the Jihad,” Alia said, “who’d pounce if they 
learned of this.” 
“But it’s only his police force!” Irulan protested. 
“Then they have no need for landing manuevers,” Paul said. “I suggest 
that your next little note to your father contain a frank and direct discussion 
of my views about his delicate position.” 
She lowered her gaze. “Yes, m’Lord. I hope that will be the end of it. My 
father would make a good martyr.” 
“Mmmmmm,”  Paul  said.  “My  sister  wouldn’t  send  a  message  to  those 
commanders she mentioned unless I ordered it.” 
“An attack on my father carries dangers other than the obvious military 
ones,” Irulan said. “People are beginning to look back on his reign with a 
certain nostalgia.” 
“You’ll  go  too  far  one  day,”  Chani  said  in  her  deadly  serious  Fremen 
voice. 
“Enough!” Paul ordered. 
He weighed Irulan’s revelation about public nostalgia—ah, now! that’d 
carried a note of truth. Once more, Irulan had proved her worth. 
“The Bene Gesserit send a formal supplication,” Stilgar said, presenting 
another  folder.  “They  wish  to  consult  you  about  the  preservation  of  your 
bloodline.” 
Chani  glanced  sideways  at  the  folder  as  though  it  contained  a  deadly 
device. 
“Send the Sisterhood the usual excuses,” Paul said. 
“Must we?” Irulan demanded. 
“Perhaps … this is the time to discuss it,” Chani said. 
Paul shook his head sharply. They couldn’t know that this was part of the 
price he had not yet decided to pay. 
But Chani wasn’t to be stopped. “I have been to the prayer wall of Sietch 
Tabr where I was born,” she said. “I have submitted to doctors. I have knelt 
in the desert and sent my thoughts into the depths where dwells Shai-hulud. 
Yet”—she shrugged—“nothing avails.” 
Science and superstition, all have failed her , Paul thought.  Do I fail her, too, 
by not telling her what bearing an heir to House Atreides will precipitate? 
 He 
looked up to ?nd an expression of pity in Alia’s eyes. The idea of pity from 
his sister repelled him. Had she, too, seen that terrifying future? 
“My  Lord  must  know  the  dangers  to  his  realm  when  he  has  no  heir,” 
Irulan  said,  using  her  Bene  Gesserit  powers  of  voice  with  an  oily 
persuasiveness. “These things are naturally di?cult to discuss, but they must 
be brought into the open. An Emperor is more than a man. His ?gure leads 
the realm. Should he die without an heir, civil strife must follow. As you love 
your people, you cannot leave them thus?” 
Paul pushed himself away from the table, strode to the balcony windows. 
A  wind  was  ?attening  the  smoke  of  the  city’s  ?res  out  there.  The  sky 
presented a darkening silver-blue softened by the evening fall of dust from 
the Shield Wall. He stared southward at the escarpment which protected his 
northern lands from the coriolis wind, and he wondered why his own peace 
of mind could ?nd no such shield. 
The Council sat silently waiting behind him, aware of how close to rage 
he was. 
Paul  sensed  time  rushing  upon  him.  He  tried  to  force  himself  into  a 
tranquility of many balances where he might shape a new future. 
Disengage … disengage … disengage , he thought. What would happen if he 
took Chani, just picked up and left with her, sought sanctuary on Tupile? His 
name would remain behind. The Jihad would ?nd new and more terrible 
centers upon which to turn. He’d be blamed for that, too. He felt suddenly 
fearful that in reaching for any new thing he might let fall what was most 
precious,  that  even  the  slightest  noise  from  him  might  send  the  universe 
crashing back, receding until he never could recapture any piece of it. 
Below him, the square had become the setting for a band of pilgrims in 
the green and white of the hajj. They wended their way like a disjointed 
snake  behind  a  striding  Arrakeen  guide.  They  reminded  Paul  that  his 
reception  hall  would  be  packed  with  supplicants  by  now.  Pilgrims!  Their 
exercise in homelessness had become a disgusting source of wealth for his 
Imperium. The hajj ?lled the spaceways with religious tramps. They came 
and they came and they came. 
How did I set this in motion?  he asked himself. 
It had, of course, set itself in motion. It was in the genes which might 
labor for centuries to achieve this brief spasm. 
Driven by that deepest religious instinct, the people came, seeking their 
resurrection. The pilgrimage ended here—“Arrakis, the place of rebirth, the 
place to die.” 
Snide old Fremen said he wanted the pilgrims for their water. 
What was it the pilgrims really sought? Paul wondered. They said they 
came to a holy place. But they must know the universe contained no Eden- 
source, no Tupile for the soul. They called Arrakis the place of the unknown 
where all mysteries were explained. This was a link between their universe 
and the next. And the frightening thing was that they appeared to go away 
satis?ed. 
What do they ?nd here?  Paul asked himself. 
Often in their religious ecstasy, they ?lled the streets with screeching like 
some odd aviary. In fact, the Fremen called them “passage birds.” And the 
few who died here were “winged souls.” 
With a sigh, Paul thought how each new planet his legions subjugated 
opened new sources of pilgrims. They came out of gratitude for “the peace of 
Muad’Dib.” 
Everywhere there is peace , Paul thought.  Everywhere … except in the heart of 
Muad’Dib 
. 
He felt that some element of himself lay immersed in frosty hoar-darkness 
without  end.  His  prescient  power  had  tampered  with  the  image  of  the 
universe held by all mankind. He had shaken the safe cosmos and replaced 
security with his Jihad. He had out-fought and out-thought and out-predicted 
the universe of men, but a certainty ?lled him that this universe still eluded 
him. 
This  planet  beneath  him  which  he  had  commanded  be  remade  from 
desert into a water-rich paradise, it was alive. It had a pulse as dynamic as 
that of any human. It fought him, resisted, slipped away from his commands 
… 
A hand crept into Paul’s. He looked down to see Chani peering up at him, 
concern in her eyes. Those eyes drank him, and she whispered: “Please, love, 
do not battle with your ruh-self.” An outpouring of emotion swept upward 
from her hand, buoyed him. 
“Sihaya,” he whispered. 
“We must go to the desert soon,” she said in a low voice. 
He  squeezed  her  hand,  released  it,  returned  to  the  table  where  he 
remained standing. 
Chani took her seat. 
Irulan stared at the papers in front of Stilgar, her mouth a tight line. 
“Irulan proposes herself as mother of the Imperial heir,” Paul said. He 
glanced at Chani, back to Irulan, who refused to meet his gaze. “We all know 
she holds no love for me.” 
Irulan went very still. 
“I know the political arguments,” Paul said. “It’s the human arguments 
which concern me. I think if the Princess Consort were not bound by the 
commands of the Bene Gesserit, if she did not seek this out of desires for 
personal  power,  my  reaction  would  be  very  di?erent.  As  matters  stand, 
though, I reject this proposal.” 
Irulan took a deep, shaky breath. 
Paul, resuming his seat, thought he had never seen her under such poor 
control. Leaning toward her, he said: “Irulan, I am truly sorry.” 
She lifted her chin, a look of pure fury in her eyes. “I don’t want your 
pity!” she hissed. And turning to Stilgar: “Is there more that’s urgent and 
dire?” 
Holding his gaze ?rmly on Paul, Stilgar said: “One more matter, m’Lord. 
The Guild again proposes a formal embassy here on Arrakis.” 
“One  of  the  deep-space  kind?”  Korba  asked,  his  voice  full  of  fanatic 
loathing. 
“Presumably,” Stilgar said. 
“A matter to be considered with the utmost care, m’Lord,” Korba warned. 
“The Council of Naibs would not like it, an actual Guildsman here on Arrakis. 
They contaminate the very ground they touch.” 
“They live in tanks and don’t touch the ground,” Paul said, letting his 
voice reveal irritation. 
“The Naibs might take matters into their own hands, m’Lord,” Korba said. 
Paul glared at him. 
“They are Fremen, after all, m’Lord,” Korba insisted. “We well remember 
how the Guild brought those who oppressed us. We have not forgotten the 
way they blackmailed a spice ransom from us to keep our secrets from our 
enemies. They drained us of every—” 
“Enough!” Paul snapped. “Do you think  have forgotten?”  I 
As though he had just awakened to the import of his own words, Korba 
stuttered unintelligibly, then: “M’Lord, forgive me. I did not mean to imply 
you are not a Fremen. I did not …” 
“They’ll send a Steersman,” Paul said. “It isn’t likely a Steersman would 
come here if he could see danger in it.” 
Her mouth dry with sudden fear, Irulan said: “You’ve …  seen  a Steersman 
come here?” 
“Of course I haven’t  seen  a Steersman,” Paul said, mimicking her tone. 
“But I can see where one’s been and where one’s going. Let them send us a 
Steersman. Perhaps I have a use for such a one.” 
“So ordered,” Stilgar said. 
And Irulan, hiding a smile behind her hand, thought:  It’s true then. Our 
Emperor  cannot  see  a  Steersman.  They  are  mutually  blind.  The  conspiracy  is 
hidden . 
“Once more the drama begins.” 
—The Emperor Paul Muad’Dib on his ascension to the Lion 
Throne 
Alia peered down from her spy window into the great reception hall to watch 
the advance of the Guild entourage. 
The sharply silver light of noon poured through clerestory windows onto 
a ?oor worked in green, blue and egg-shell tiles to simulate a bayou with 
water plants and, here and there, a splash of exotic color to indicate bird or 
animal. 
Guildsmen moved across the tile pattern like hunters stalking their prey 
in a strange jungle. They formed a moving design of gray robes, black robes, 
orange  robes—all  arrayed  in  a  deceptively  random  way  around  the 
transparent tank where the Steersman-Ambassador swam in his orange gas. 
The tank slid on its supporting ?eld, towed by two gray-robed attendants, 
like a rectangular ship being warped into its dock. 
Directly beneath her, Paul sat on the Lion Throne on its raised dais. He 
wore  the  new  formal  crown  with  its  ?sh  and  ?st  emblems.  The  jeweled 
golden robes of state covered his body. The shimmering of a personal shield 
surrounded him. Two wings of bodyguards fanned out on both sides along 
the dais and down the steps. Stilgar stood two steps below Paul’s right hand 
in a white robe with a yellow rope for a belt. 
Sibling empathy told her that Paul seethed with the same agitation she 
was experiencing, although she doubted another could detect it. His attention 
remained  on  an  orange-robed  attendant  whose  blindly  staring  metal  eyes 
looked neither to right nor to left. This attendant walked at the right front 
corner of the Ambassador’s troupe like a military outrider. A rather ?at face 
beneath curly black hair, such of his ?gure as could be seen beneath the 
orange robe, every gesture shouted a familiar identity. 
It was Duncan Idaho. 
It could not be Duncan Idaho, yet it was. 
Captive  memories  absorbed  in  the  womb  during  the  moment  of  her 
mother’s spice change identi?ed this man for Alia by a rihani decipherment 
which cut through all camou?age. Paul was seeing him, she knew, out of 
countless personal experiences, out of gratitudes and youthful sharing. 
It was Duncan. 
Alia  shuddered.  There  could  be  only  one  answer:  this  was  a  Tleilaxu 
ghola, a being reconstructed from the dead ?esh of the original. That original 
had perished saving Paul. This could only be a product of the axolotl tanks. 
The ghola walked with the cock-footed alertness of a master swordsman. 
He came to a halt as the Ambassador’s tank glided to a stop ten paces from 
the steps of the dais. 
In the Bene Gesserit way she could not escape, Alia read Paul’s disquiet. 
He no longer looked at the ?gure out of his past. Not looking, his whole 
being stared. Muscles strained against restrictions as he nodded to the Guild 
Ambassador, said: “I am told your name is Edric. We welcome you to our 
Court in the hope this will bring new understanding between us.” 
The  Steersman  assumed  a  sybaritic  reclining  pose  in  his  orange  gas, 
popped a melange capsule into his mouth before meeting Paul’s gaze. The 
tiny  transducer  orbiting  a  corner  of  the  Guildsman’s  tank  reproduced  a 
coughing sound, then the rasping, uninvolved voice: “I abase myself before 
my Emperor and beg leave to present my credentials and o?er a small gift.” 
An  aide  passed  a  scroll  up  to  Stilgar,  who  studied  it,  scowling,  then 
nodded to Paul. Both Stilgar and Paul turned then toward the ghola standing 
patiently below the dais. 
“Indeed my Emperor has discerned the gift,” Edric said. 
“We are pleased to accept your credentials,” Paul said. “Explain the gift.” 
Edric rolled in the tank, bringing his attention to bear on the ghola. “This 
is  a  man  called  Hayt,”  he  said,  spelling  the  name.  “According  to  our 
investigators, he has a most curious history. He was killed here on Arrakis … 
a grievous head-wound which required many months of regrowth. The body 
was sold to the Bene Tleilax as that of a master swordsman, an adept of the 
Ginaz School. It came to our attention that this must be Duncan Idaho, the 
trusted  retainer  of  your  household.  We  bought  him  as  a  gift  be?tting  an 
Emperor.” Edric peered up at Paul. “Is it not Idaho, Sire?” 
Restraint and caution gripped Paul’s voice. “He has the aspect of Idaho.” 
Does Paul see something I don’t?  Alia wondered.  No! It’s Duncan! 
The man called Hayt stood impassively, metal eyes ?xed straight ahead, 
body relaxed. No sign escaped him to indicate he knew himself to be the 
object of discussion. 
“According to our best knowledge, it’s Idaho,” Edric said. 
“He’s called Hayt now,” Paul said. “A curious name.” 
“Sire, there’s no divining how or why the Tleilaxu bestow names,” Edric 
said. “But names can be changed. The Tleilaxu name is of little importance.” 
This is a Tleilaxu thing , Paul thought.  There’s the problem . The Bene Tleilax 
held little attachment to phenomenal nature. Good and evil carried strange 
meanings in their philosophy. What might they have incorporated in Idaho’s 
?esh—out of design or whim? 
Paul glanced at Stilgar, noted the Fremen’s superstitious awe. It was an 
emotion  echoed  all  through  his  Fremen  guard.  Stilgar’s  mind  would  be 
speculating  about  the  loathsome  habits  of  Guildsmen,  of  Tleilaxu  and  of 
gholas. 
Turning toward the ghola, Paul said; “Hayt, is that your only name?” 
A  serene  smile  spread  over  the  ghola’s  dark  features.  The  metal  eyes 
lifted, centered on Paul, but maintained their mechanical stare. “That is how 
I am called, my Lord: Hayt.” 
In her dark spy hole, Alia trembled. It was Idaho’s voice, a quality of 
sound so precise she sensed its imprint upon her cells. 
“May it please my Lord,” the ghola added, “if I say his voice gives me 
pleasure. This is a sign, say the Bene Tleilax, that I have heard the voice … 
before.” 
“But you don’t know this for sure,” Paul said. 
“I know nothing of my past for sure, my Lord. It was explained that I can 
have  no  memory  of  my  former  life.  All  that  remains  from  before  is  the 
pattern set by the genes. There are, however, niches into which once-familiar 
things  may  ?t.  There  are  voices,  places,  foods,  faces,  sounds,  actions—a 
sword in my hand, the controls of a ’thopter …” 
Noting how intently the Guildsmen watched this exchange, Paul asked: 
“Do you understand that you’re a gift?” 
“It was explained to me, my Lord.” 
Paul sat back, hands resting on the arms of the throne. 
What debt do I owe Duncan’s ?esh?  he wondered.  The man died saving my 
life. But this is not Idaho, this is a ghola 
. Yet, here were body and mind which 
had taught Paul to ?y a ’thopter as though the wings grew from his own 
shoulders. Paul knew he could not pick up a sword without leaning on the 
harsh education Idaho had given him. A ghola. This was ?esh full of false 
impressions, easily misread. Old associations would persist. 
 Duncan Idaho . It 
wasn’t so much a mask the ghola wore as it was a loose, concealing garment 
of personality which moved in a way di?erent from whatever the Tleilaxu 
had hidden here. 
“How might you serve us?” Paul asked. 
“In any way my Lord’s wishes and my capabilities agree.” 
Alia, watching from her vantage point, was touched by the ghola’s air of 
di?dence.  She  detected  nothing  feigned.  Something  ultimately  innocent 
shone from the new Duncan Idaho. The original had been worldly, devil- 
may-care. But this ?esh had been cleansed of all that. It was a pure surface 
upon which the Tleilaxu had written … what? 
She sensed the hidden perils in this gift then. This was a Tleilaxu thing. 
The Tleilaxu displayed a disturbing lack of inhibitions in what they created. 
Unbridled curiosity might guide their actions. They boasted they could make 
anything  from the proper human raw material—devils or saints. They sold 
killermentats.  They’d  produced  a  killer  medic,  overcoming  the  Suk 
inhibitions against the taking of human life to do it. Their wares included 
willing  menials,  pliant  sex  toys  for  any  whim,  soldiers,  generals, 
philosophers, even an occasional moralist. 
Paul stirred, looked at Edric. “How has this  gift  been trained?” he asked. 
“If it please my Lord,” Edric said, “it amused the Tleilaxu to train this 
ghola as a mentat and philosopher of the Zensunni. Thus, they sought to 
increase his abilities with the sword.” 
“Did they succeed?” 
“I do not know, my Lord.” 
Paul weighed the answer. Truthsense told him Edric sincerely believed 
the  ghola  to  be  Idaho.  But  there  was  more.  The  waters  of  Time  through 
which this oracular Steersman moved suggested dangers without revealing 
them. 
 Hayt . The Tleilaxu name spoke of peril. Paul felt himself tempted to 
reject the gift. Even as he felt the temptation, he knew he couldn’t choose 
that way. This ?esh made demands on House Atreides—a fact the enemy 
knew well. 
“Zensunni  philosopher,”  Paul  mused,  once  more  looking  at  the  ghola. 
“You’ve examined your own role and motives?” 
“I approach my service in an attitude of humility, Sire. I am a cleansed 
mind washed free of the imperatives from my human past.” 
“Would you prefer we called you Hayt or Duncan Idaho?” 
“My Lord may call me what he wishes, for I am not a name.” 
“But do you  enjoy  the name Duncan Idaho?” 
“I  think  that  was  my  name,  Sire.  It  ?ts  within  me.  Yet  …  it  stirs  up 
curious responses. One’s name, I think, must carry much that’s unpleasant 
along with the pleasant.” 
“What gives you the most pleasure?” Paul asked. 
Unexpectedly, the ghola laughed, said: “Looking for signs in others which 
reveal my former self.” 
“Do you see such signs here?” 
“Oh, yes, my Lord. Your man Stilgar there is caught between suspicion 
and admiration. He was friend to my former self, but this ghola ?esh repels 
him. You, my Lord, admired the man I was … and you trusted him.” 
“Cleansed  mind,”  Paul  said.  “How  can  a  cleansed  mind  put  itself  in 
bondage to us?” 
“Bondage, my Lord? The cleansed mind makes decisions in the presence 
of unknowns and without cause and e?ect. Is this bondage?” 
Paul scowled. It was a Zensunni saying, cryptic, apt—immersed in a creed 
which  denied  objective  function  in  all  mental  activity. 
  Without  cause  and 
e?ect! 
 Such thoughts shocked the mind.  Unknowns?  Unknowns lay in every 
decision, even in the oracular vision. 
“You’d prefer we called you Duncan Idaho?” Paul asked. 
“We live by di?erences, my Lord. Choose a name for me.” 
“Let your Tleilaxu name stand,” Paul said. “Hayt—there’s a name inspires 
caution.” 
Hayt bowed, moved back one step. 
And Alia wondered:  How did he know the interview was over? I knew it 
because I know my brother. But there was no sign a stranger could read. Did the 
Duncan Idaho in him know? 
Paul turned toward the Ambassador, said: “Quarters have been set aside 
for your embassy. It is our desire to have a private consultation with you at 
the earliest opportunity. We will send for you. Let us inform you further, 
before you hear it from an inaccurate source, that a Reverend Mother of the 
Sisterhood,  Gaius  Helen  Mohiam,  has  been  removed  from  the  heighliner 
which brought you. It was done at our command. Her presence on your ship 
will be an item in our talks.” 
A wave of Paul’s left hand dismissed the envoy. “Hayt,” Paul said, “stay 
here.” 
The  Ambassador’s  attendants  backed  away,  towing  the  tank.  Edric 
became orange motion in orange gas—eyes, a mouth, gently waving limbs. 
Paul watched until the last Guildsman was gone, the great doors swinging 
closed behind them. 
I’ve done it now , Paul thought.  I’ve accepted the ghola . The Tleilaxu creation 
was bait, no doubt of it. Very likely the old hag of a Reverend Mother played 
the same role. But it was the time of the tarot which he’d forecast in an early 
vision. The damnable tarot! It muddied the waters of Time until the prescient 
strained to detect moments but an hour o?. Many a ?sh took the bait and 
escaped,  he  reminded  himself.  And  the  tarot  worked  for  him  as  well  as 
against him. What he could not see, others might not detect as well. 
The ghola stood, head cocked to one side, waiting. 
Stilgar  moved  across  the  steps,  hid  the  ghola  from  Paul’s  view.  In 
Chakobsa,  the  hunting  language  of  their  sietch  days,  Stilgar  said:  “That 
creature in the tank gives me the shudders, Sire, but this  gift!  Send it away!” 
In the same tongue, Paul said: “I cannot.” 
“Idaho’s dead,” Stilgar argued. “This isn’t Idaho. Let me take its water for 
the tribe.” 
“The ghola is my problem, Stil. Your problem is our prisoner. I want the 
Reverend Mother guarded most carefully by the men I trained to resist the 
wiles of Voice.” 
“I like this not, Sire.” 
“I’ll be cautious, Stil. See that you are, too.” 
“Very well, Sire.” Stilgar stepped down to the ?oor of the hall, passed 
close to Hayt, sni?ed him and strode out. 
Evil can be detected by its smell , Paul thought. Stilgar had planted the green 
and white Atreides banner on a dozen worlds, but remained superstitious 
Fremen, proof against any sophistication. 
Paul studied the gift. 
“Duncan, Duncan,” he whispered. “What have they done to you?” 
“They gave me life, m’Lord,” Hayt said. 
“But why were you trained and given to us?” Paul asked. 
Hayt pursed his lips, then: “They intend me to destroy you.” 
The statement’s candor shook Paul. But then, how else could a Zensunni- 
mentat  respond?  Even  in  a  ghola,  a  mentat  could  speak  no  less  than  the 
truth, especially out of Zensunni inner calm. This was a human computer, 
mind  and  nervous  system  ?tted  to  the  tasks  relegated  long  ago  to  hated 
mechanical devices. To condition him also as a Zensunni meant a double 
ration of honesty … unless the Tleilaxu had built something even more odd 
into this ?esh. 
Why, for example, the mechanical eyes? Tleilaxu boasted their metal eyes 
improved on the original. Strange, then, that more Tleilaxu didn’t wear them 
out of choice. 
Paul glanced up at Alia’s spy hole, longed for her presence and advice, for 
counsel not clouded by feelings of responsibility and debt. 
Once more, he looked at the ghola. This was no frivolous gift. It gave 
honest answers to dangerous questions. 
It makes no di?erence that I know this is a weapon to be used against me , 
Paul thought. 
“What should I do to protect myself from you?” Paul asked. It was direct 
speech, no royal “we,” but a question as he might have put it to the old 
Duncan Idaho. 
“Send me away, m’Lord.” 
Paul shook his head from side to side. “How are you to destroy me?” 
Hayt  looked  at  the  guards,  who’d  moved  closer  to  Paul  after  Stilgar’s 
departure. He turned, cast his gaze around the hall, brought his metal eyes 
back to bear on Paul, nodded. 
“This is a place where a man draws away from people,” Hayt said. “It 
speaks of such power that one can contemplate it comfortably only in the 
remembrance that all things are ?nite. Did my Lord’s oracular powers plot 
his course into this place?” 
Paul drummed his ?ngers against the throne’s arms. The mentat sought 
data,  but  the  question  disturbed  him.  “I  came  to  this  position  by  strong 
decisions … not always out of my other … abilities.” 
“Strong decisions,” Hayt said. “These temper a man’s life. One can take 
the temper from ?ne metal by heating it and allowing it to cool without 
quenching.” 
“Do you divert me with Zensunni prattle?” Paul asked. 
“Zensunni has other avenues to explore, Sire, than diversion and display.” 
Paul wet his lips with his tongue, drew in a deep breath, set his own 
thoughts into the counterbalance poise of the mentat. Negative answers arose 
around him. It wasn’t expected that he’d go haring after the ghola to the 
exclusion  of  other  duties.  No,  that  wasn’t  it.  Why  a 
  Zensunni -mentat? 
Philosophy…words  …  contemplation  …  inward  searching  …  He  felt  the 
weakness of his data. 
“We need more data,” he muttered. 
“The facts needed by a mentat do not brush o? onto one as you might 
gather pollen on your robe while passing through a ?eld of ?owers,” Hayt 
said.  “One  chooses  his  pollen  carefully,  examines  it  under  powerful 
ampli?cation.” 
“You must teach me this Zensunni way with rhetoric,” Paul said. 
The metallic eyes glittered at him for a moment, then: “M’Lord, perhaps 
that’s what was intended.” 
To blunt my will with words and ideas?  Paul wondered. 
“Ideas are most to be feared when they become actions,” Paul said. 
“Send me away, Sire,” Hayt said, and it was Duncan Idaho’s voice full of 
concern for “the young master.” 
Paul felt trapped by that voice. He couldn’t send that voice away, even 
when it came from a ghola. “You will stay,” he said, “and we’ll both exercise 
caution.” 
Hayt bowed in submission. 
Paul glanced up at the spy hole, eyes pleading for Alia to take this  gift  o? 
his hands and ferret out its secrets. Gholas were ghosts to frighten children. 
He’d never thought to know one. To know this one, he had to set himself 
above all compassion … and he wasn’t certain he could do it. 
 Duncan … 
Duncan … 
 Where was Idaho in this shaped-to-measure ?esh? It wasn’t ?esh 
… it was a shroud in ?eshly shape! Idaho lay dead forever on the ?oor of an 
Arrakeen cavern. His ghost stared out of metal eyes. Two beings stood side 
by side in this revenant ?esh. One was a threat with its force and nature 
hidden behind unique veils. 
Closing his eyes, Paul allowed old visions to sift through his awareness. 
He sensed the spirits of love and hate spouting there in a rolling sea from 
which no rock lifted above the chaos. No place at all from which to survey 
turmoil. 
Why  has  no  vision  shown  me  this  new  Duncan  Idaho?   he  asked  himself. 
What concealed Time from an oracle? Other oracles, obviously . 
Paul  opened  his  eyes,  asked:  “Hayt,  do  you  have  the  power  of 
prescience?” 
“No, m’Lord.” 
Sincerity spoke in that voice. It was possible the ghola didn’t know he 
possessed this ability, of course. But that’d hamper his working as a mentat. 
What was the hidden design? 
Old  visions  surged around  Paul. Would he have  to choose  the  terrible 
way? Distorted Time hinted at this ghola in that hideous future. Would that 
way close in upon him no matter what he did? 
Disengage … disengage … disengage … 
The thought tolled in his mind. 
In her position above Paul, Alia sat with chin cupped in left hand, stared 
down at the ghola. A magnetic attraction about this Hayt reached up to her. 
Tleilaxu restoration had given him youth, an innocent intensity which called 
out to her. She’d understood Paul’s unspoken plea. When oracles failed, one 
turned to real spies and physical powers. She wondered, though, at her own 
eagerness to accept this challenge. She felt a positive desire to be near this 
new  man, perhaps to touch him. 
He’s a danger to both of us , she thought. 
Truth su?ers from too much analysis . 
—Ancient Fremen Saying 
“Reverend Mother, I shudder to see you in such circumstances,” Irulan said. 
She stood just inside the cell door, measuring the various capacities of the 
room  in  her  Bene  Gesserit  way.  It  was  a  three-meter  cube  carved  with 
cutterays from the veined brown rock beneath Paul’s Keep. For furnishings, it 
contained  one  ?imsy  basket  chair  occupied  now  by  the  Reverend  Mother 
Gaius  Helen  Mohiam,  a  pallet  with  a  brown  cover  upon  which  had  been 
spread a deck of the new Dune Tarot cards, a metered water tap above a 
reclamation  basin,  a  Fremen  privy  with  moisture  seals.  It  was  all  sparse, 
primitive. Yellow light came from anchored and caged glowglobes at the four 
corners of the ceiling. 
“You’ve sent word to the Lady Jessica?” the Reverend Mother asked. 
“Yes, but I don’t expect her to lift one ?nger against her ?rstborn,” Irulan 
said. She glanced at the cards. They spoke of the powerful turning their backs 
on  supplicants.  The  card  of  the  Great  Worm  lay  beneath  Desolate  Sand. 
Patience was counseled. 
 Did one require the tarot to see this?  she asked herself. 
A guard stood outside watching them through a meta-glass window in the 
door. Irulan knew there’d be other monitors on this encounter. She had put 
in much thought and planning before daring to come here. To have stayed 
away carried its own perils, though. 
The Reverend Mother had been engaged in  prajna  meditation interspersed 
with examinations of the tarot. Despite a feeling that she would never leave 
Arrakis  alive,  she  had  achieved  a  measure  of  calm  through  this.  One’s 
oracular powers might be small, but muddy water was muddy water. And 
there was always the Litany Against Fear. 
She had yet to assimilate the import of the actions which had precipitated 
her into this cell. Dark suspicions brooded in her mind (and the tarot hinted 
at con?rmations). Was it possible the Guild had planned this? 
A yellow-robed Qizara, head shaved for a turban, beady eyes of total blue 
in a bland round face, skin leathered by the wind and sun of Arrakis, had 
awaited her on the heighliner’s reception bridge. He had looked up from a 
bulb of spice-co?ee being served by an obsequious steward, studied her a 
moment, put down the co?ee bulb. 
“You are the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam?” 
To replay those words in her mind was to bring that moment alive in the 
memory. Her throat had constricted with an unmanageable spasm of fear. 
How  had  one  of  the  Emperor’s  minions  learned  of  her  presence  on  the 
heighliner? 
“It came to our attention that you were aboard,” the Qizara said. “Have 
you forgotten that you are denied permission to set foot on the holy planet?” 
“I am not on Arrakis,” she said. “I’m a passenger on a Guild heighliner in 
free space.” 
“There is no such thing as free space, Madame.” 
She read hate mingled with profound suspicion in his tone. 
“Muad’Dib rules everywhere,” he said. 
“Arrakis is not my destination,” she insisted. 
“Arrakis is the destination of everyone,” he said. And she feared for a 
moment that he would launch into a recital of the mystical itinerary which 
pilgrims followed. (This very ship had carried thousands of them.) 
But the Qizara had pulled a golden amulet from beneath his robe, kissed 
it, touched it to his forehead and placed it to his right ear, listened. Presently, 
he restored the amulet to its hidden place. 
“You are ordered to gather your luggage and accompany me to Arrakis.” 
“But I have business elsewhere!” 
In that moment, she suspected Guild per?dy … or exposure through some 
transcendent power of the Emperor or his sister. Perhaps the Steersman did 
not  conceal  the  conspiracy,  after  all.  The  abomination,  Alia,  certainly 
possessed the abilities of a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother. What happened 
when  those  powers  were  coupled  with  the  forces  which  worked  in  her 
brother? 
“At once!” the Qizara snapped. 
Everything  in  her  cried  out  against  setting  foot  once  more  on  that 
accursed desert planet. Here was where the Lady Jessica had turned against 
the  Sisterhood.  Here  was  where  they’d  lost  Paul  Atreides,  the  Kwisatz 
Haderach they’d sought through long generations of careful breeding. 
“At once,” she agreed. 
“There’s little time,” the Qizara said. “When the Emperor commands, all 
his subjects obey.” 
So the order had come from Paul! 
She thought of protesting to the heighliner’s Navigator-Commander, but 
the futility of such a gesture stopped her. What could the Guild do? 
“The Emperor has said I must die if I set foot on Dune,” she said, making 
a last desperate e?ort. “You spoke of this yourself. You are condemning me if 
you take me down there.” 
“Say no more,” the Qizara ordered. “The thing is ordained.” 
That  was  how  they  always  spoke  of  Imperial  commands,  she  knew. 
Ordained!   The  holy  ruler  whose  eyes  could  pierce  the  future  had  spoken. 
What must be must be. He had seen it, had He not? 
With the sick feeling that she was caught in a web of her own spinning, 
she had turned to obey. 
And the web had become a cell which Irulan could visit. She saw that 
Irulan had aged somewhat since their meeting on Wallach IX. New lines of 
worry spread from the corners of her eyes. Well… time to see if this Sister of 
the Bene Gesserit could obey her vows. 
“I’ve had worse quarters,” the Reverend Mother said. “Do you come from 
the Emperor?” And she allowed her ?ngers to move as though in agitation. 
Irulan read the moving ?ngers and her own ?ngers ?ashed an answer as 
she spoke, saying: “No—I came as soon as I heard you were here.” 
“Won’t the Emperor be angry?” the Reverend Mother asked. Again, her 
?ngers moved: imperative, pressing, demanding. 
“Let him be angry. You were my teacher in the Sisterhood, just as you 
were the teacher of his own mother. Does he think I will turn my back on 
you as she has done?” And Irulan’s ?nger-talk made excuses, begged. 
The Reverend Mother sighed. On the surface, it was the sigh of a prisoner 
bemoaning  her  fate,  but  inwardly  she  felt  the  response  as  a  comment  on 
Irulan. It was futile to hope the Atreides Emperor’s precious gene pattern 
could  be  preserved  through  this  instrument.  No  matter  her  beauty,  this 
Princess was ?awed. Under that veneer of sexual attraction lived a whining 
shrew  more  interested  in  words  than  in  actions.  Irulan  was  still  a  Bene 
Gesserit, though, and the Sisterhood reserved certain techniques to use on 
some  of  its  weaker  vessels  as  insurance  that  vital  instructions  would  be 
carried out. 
Beneath small talk about a softer pallet, better food, the Reverend Mother 
brought up her arsenal of persuasion and gave her orders: the brother-sister 
crossbreeding  must  be  explored.  (Irulan  almost  broke  at  receiving  this 
command.) 
“I must have my chance!” Irulan’s ?ngers pleaded. 
“You’ve had your chance,” the Reverend Mother countered. And she was 
explicit in her instructions: Was the Emperor ever angry with his concubine? 
His unique powers must make him lonely. To whom could he speak in any 
hope  of  being  understood?  To  the  sister,  obviously.  She  shared  this 
loneliness. The depth of their communion must be exploited. Opportunities 
must be created to throw them together in privacy. Intimate encounters must 
be arranged. The possibility of eliminating the concubine must be explored. 
Grief dissolved traditional barriers. 
Irulan protested. If Chani were killed, suspicion would fasten immediately 
upon the Princess-Consort. Besides, there were other problems. Chani had 
fastened upon an ancient Fremen diet supposed to promote fertility and the 
diet  eliminated  all  opportunity  for  administering  the  contraceptive  drugs. 
Lifting the suppressives would make Chani even more fertile. 
The Reverend Mother was outraged and concealed it with di?culty while 
her  ?ngers  ?ashed  their  demands.  Why  had  this  information  not  been 
conveyed at the beginning of their conversation? How could Irulan be that 
stupid? If Chani conceived and bore a son, the Emperor would declare the 
child his heir! 
Irulan protested that she understood the dangers, but the genes might not 
be totally lost. 
Damn  such  stupidity!   the  Reverend  Mother  raged.  Who  knew  what 
suppressions and genetic entanglements Chani might introduce from her wild 
Fremen strain? The Sisterhood must have only the pure line! And an heir 
would renew Paul’s ambitions, spur him to new e?orts in consolidating his 
Empire. The conspiracy could not a?ord such a setback. 
Defensively, Irulan wanted to know how she could have prevented Chani 
from trying this diet? 
But the Reverend Mother was in no mood for excuses. Irulan received 
explicit  instructions  now  to  meet  this  new  threat.  If  Chani  conceived,  an 
abortifact must be introduced into her food or drink. Either that, or she must 
be killed. An heir to the throne from that source must be prevented at all 
costs. 
An abortifact would be as dangerous as an open attack on the concubine, 
Irulan objected. She trembled at the thought of trying to kill Chani. 
Was Irulan deterred by danger? the Reverend Mother wanted to know, 
her ?nger-talk conveying deep scorn. 
Angered, Irulan signaled that she knew her value as an agent in the royal 
household. Did the conspiracy wish to waste such a valuable agent? Was she 
to be thrown away? In what other way could they keep this close watch on 
the Emperor? Or had they introduced another agent into the household? Was 
that it? Was she to be used now, desperately, and for the last time? 
In  a  war,  all  values  acquired  new  relationships,  the  Reverend  Mother 
countered. Their greatest peril was that House Atreides should secure itself 
with an Imperial line. The Sisterhood could not take such a risk. This went 
far beyond the danger to the Atreides genetic pattern. Let Paul anchor his 
family to the throne and the Sisterhood could look forward to centuries of 
disruption for its programs. 
Irulan understood the argument, but she couldn’t escape the thought that 
a decision had been made to spend the Princess-Consort for something of 
great value. Was there something she should know about the ghola? Irulan 
ventured. 
The Reverend Mother wanted to know if Irulan thought the Sisterhood 
composed of fools. When had they ever failed to tell Irulan all she 
 should 
know? 
It was no answer, but an admission of concealment, Irulan saw. It said she 
would be told no more than she needed to know. 
How  could  they  be  certain  the  ghola  was  capable  of  destroying  the 
Emperor? Irulan asked. 
She could just as well have asked if melange were capable of destruction, 
the Reverend Mother countered. 
It was a rebuke with a subtle message, Irulan realized. The Bene Gesserit 
“whip that instructs” informed her that she should have understood long ago 
this similarity between the spice and the ghola. Melange was valuable, but it 
exacted a price—addiction. It added years to a life—decades for some—but it 
was still just another way to die. 
The ghola was something of deadly value. 
The obvious way to prevent an unwanted birth was to kill the prospective 
mother before conception, the Reverend Mother signaled, returning to the 
attack. 
Of course , Irulan thought.  If you decide to spend a certain sum, get as much 
for it as you can. 
The Reverend Mother’s eyes, dark with the blue brilliance of her melange 
addiction, stared up at Irulan, measuring, waiting, observing minutiae. 
She  reads  me  clearly ,  Irulan  thought  with  dismay.   She  trained  me  and 
observed me in that training. She knows I realize what decision has been taken 
here. She only observes now to see how I will take this knowledge. Well, I will take 
it as a Bene Gesserit and a princess 
. 
Irulan  managed  a  smile,  pulled  herself  erect,  thought  of  the  evocative 
opening passage of the Litany Against Fear: 
“I must not fear. Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little-death that brings total 
obliteration. I will face my fear …” 
When calmness had returned, she thought:  Let them spend me. I will show 
them what a princess is worth. Perhaps I’ll buy them more than they expected 
. 
After a few more empty vocalizations to bind o? the interview, Irulan 
departed. 
When she had gone, the Reverend Mother returned to her tarot cards, 
laying them out in the ?re-eddy pattern. Immediately, she got the Kwisatz 
Haderach of the Major Arcana and the card lay coupled with the Eight of 
Ships:  the  sibyl  hoodwinked  and  betrayed.  These  were  not  cards  of  good 
omen: they spoke of concealed resources for her enemies. 
She  turned  away  from  the  cards,  sat  in  agitation,  wondering  if  Irulan 
might yet destroy them. 
The Fremen see her as the Earth Figure, a demigoddess whose special charge is 
to protect the tribes through her powers of violence. She is Reverend Mother to 
their Reverend Mothers. To pilgrims who seek her out with demands that she 
restore virility or make the barren fruitful, she is a form of anti-mentat. She 
feeds on that strong human desire for the mysterious. She is living proof that the 
“analytic” has limits. She represents ultimate tension. She is the virgin-harlot— 
witty, vulgar, cruel, as destructive in her whims as a coriolis storm 
. 
—St. Alia of the Knife as taken from The Irulan Report 
Alia stood like a black-robed sentinel ?gure on the south platform of her 
temple, the Fane of the Oracle which Paul’s Fremen cohorts had built for her 
against a wall of his stronghold. 
She hated this part of her life, but knew no way to evade the temple 
without  bringing  down  destruction  upon  them  all.  The  pilgrims  (damn 
them!)  grew  more  numerous  every  day.  The  temple’s  lower  porch  was 
crowded  with  them.  Vendors  moved  among  the  pilgrims,  and  there  were 
minor  sorcerers,  haruspices,  diviners,  all  working  their  trade  in  pitiful 
imitation of Paul Muad’Dib and his sister. 
Red and green packages containing the new Dune Tarot were prominent 
among the vendors’ wares, Alia saw. She wondered about the tarot. Who was 
feeding this device into the Arrakeen market? Why had the tarot sprung to 
prominence at this particular time and place? Was it to muddy Time? Spice 
addiction  always  conveyed  some  sensitivity  to  prediction.  Fremen  were 
notoriously fey. Was it an accident that so many of them dabbled in portents 
and  omens  here  and  now?  She  decided  to  seek  an  answer  at  the  ?rst 
opportunity. 
There was a wind from the southeast, a small leftover wind blunted by 
the scarp of the Shield Wall which loomed high in these northern reaches. 
The rim glowed orange through a thin dust haze underlighted by the late 
afternoon  sun.  It  was  a  hot  wind  against  her  cheeks  and  it  made  her 
homesick for the sand, for the security of open spaces. 
The last of the day’s mob began descending the broad greenstone steps of 
the lower porch, singly and in groups, a few pausing to stare at the keepsakes 
and holy amulets on the street vendors’ racks, some consulting one last minor 
sorcerer. Pilgrims, supplicants, townfolk, Fremen, vendors closing up for the 
day—they formed a straggling line that trailed o? into the palm-lined avenue 
which led to the heart of the city. 
Alia’s  eyes  picked  out  the  Fremen,  marking  the  frozen  looks  of 
superstitious awe on their faces, the half-wild way they kept their distance 
from the others. They were her strength and her peril. They still captured 
giant  worms  for  transport,  for  sport  and  for  sacri?ce.  They  resented  the 
o?world pilgrims, barely tolerated the townfolk of graben and 
 pan , hated the 
cynicism they saw in the street vendors. One did not jostle a wild Fremen, 
even in a mob such as the ones which swarmed to Alia’s Fane. There were no 
kni?ngs in the Sacred Precincts, but bodies had been found … later. 
The departing swarm had stirred up dust. The ?inty odor came to Alia’s 
nostrils, ignited another pang of longing for the open  bled . Her sense of the 
past, she realized, had been sharpened by the coming of the ghola. There’d 
been  much  pleasure  in  those  untrammeled  days  before  her  brother  had 
mounted the throne—time for joking, time for small things, time to enjoy a 
cool morning or a sunset, time … time … time … Even danger had been 
good  in  those  days—clean  danger  from  known  sources.  No  need  then  to 
strain the limits of prescience, to peer through murky veils for frustrating 
glimpses of the future. 
Wild Fremen said it well: “Four things cannot be hidden—love, smoke, a 
pillar of ?re and a man striding across the open bled.” 
With an abrupt feeling of revulsion, Alia retreated from the platform into 
the shadows of the Fane, strode along the balcony which looked down into 
the glistening opalescence of her Hall of Oracles. Sand on the tiles rasped 
beneath her feet. 
 Supplicants always tracked sand into the Sacred Chambers!  She 
ignored  attendants,  guards,  postulants,  the  Qizarate’s  omnipresent  priest- 
sycophants,  plunged  into  the  spiral  passage  which  twisted  upward  to  her 
private  quarters.  There,  amidst  divans,  deep  rugs,  tent  hangings  and 
mementos  of  the  desert,  she  dismissed  the  Fremen  amazons  Stilgar  had 
assigned as her personal guardians. 
 Watchdogs, more likely!  When they had 
gone, muttering and objecting, but more fearful of her than they were of 
Stilgar, she stripped o? her robe, leaving only the sheathed crysknife on its 
thong around her neck, strewed garments behind as she made for the bath. 
He was near, she knew—that shadow-?gure of a man she could sense in 
her future, but could not see. It angered her that no power of prescience 
could  put  ?esh  on  that  ?gure.  He  could  be  sensed  only  at  unexpected 
moments while she scanned the lives of others. Or she came upon a smoky 
outline  in  solitary  darkness  when  innocence  lay  coupled  with  desire.  He 
stood just beyond an un?xed horizon, and she felt that if she strained her 
talents  to  an  unexpected  intensity  she  might  see  him.  He  was 
  there —a 
constant assault on her awareness: ?erce, dangerous, immoral. 
Moist warm air surrounded her in the bath. Here was a habit she had 
learned from the memory-entities of the uncounted Reverend Mothers who 
were strung out in her awareness like pearls on a glowing necklace. Water, 
warm water in a sunken tub, accepted her skin as she slid into it. Green tiles 
with ?gures of red ?sh worked into a sea pattern surrounded the water. Such 
an abundance of water occupied this space that a Fremen of old would have 
been outraged to see it used merely for washing human ?esh. 
He  was near. 
It was lust in tension with chastity, she thought. Her ?esh desired a mate. 
Sex held no casual mystery for a Reverend Mother who had presided at the 
sietch orgies. The 
 tau  awareness of her  other-selves  could supply any detail 
her curiosity required. This feeling of nearness could be nothing other than 
?esh reaching for ?esh. 
Need for action fought lethargy in the warm water. 
Abruptly, Alia climbed dripping from the bath, strode wet and naked into 
the training chamber which adjoined her bedroom. The chamber, oblong and 
skylighted, contained the gross and subtle instruments which toned a Bene 
Gesserit  adept  into  ultimate  physical  and  mental  awareness/preparedness. 
There  were  mnemonic  ampli?ers,  digit  mills  from  Ix  to  strengthen  and 
sensitize ?ngers and toes, odor synthesizers, tactility sensitizers, temperature 
gradient ?elds, pattern betrayers to prevent her falling into detectable habits, 
alpha-wave-response trainers, blink-synchronizers to tone abilities in light/ 
dark/ spectrum analysis … 
In  ten-centimeter  letters  along  one  wall,  written  by  her  own  hand  in 
mnemonic paint, stood the key reminder from the Bene Gesserit Creed: 
“Before us, all methods of learning were tainted by instinct. We learned 
how  to  learn.  Before  us,  instinct-ridden  researchers  possessed  a  limited 
attention  span—often  no  longer  than  a  single  lifetime.  Projects  stretching 
across ?fty or more lifetimes never occurred to them. The concept of total 
muscle/nerve training had not entered awareness.” 
As  she  moved  into  the  training  room,  Alia  caught  her  own  re?ection 
multiplied  thousands  of  times  in  the  crystal  prisms  of  a  fencing  mirror 
swinging in the heart of a target dummy. She saw the long sword waiting on 
its  brackets  against  the  target,  and  she  thought: 
  Yes!  I’ll  work  myself  to 
exhaustion—drain the ?esh and clear the mind 
. 
The sword felt right in her hand. She slipped the crysknife from its sheath 
at her neck, held it sinister, tapped the activating stud with the sword tip. 
Resistance came alive as the aura of the target shield built up, pushing her 
weapon slowly and ?rmly away. 
Prisms glittered. The target slipped to her left. 
Alia followed with the tip of the long blade, thinking as she often did that 
the thing could almost be alive. But it was only servomotors and complex 
re?ector circuits designed to lure the eyes away from danger, to confuse and 
teach. It was an instrument geared to react as she reacted, an anti-self which 
moved  as  she  moved,  balancing  light  on  its  prisms,  shifting  its  target, 
o?ering its counter-blade. 
Many blades appeared to lunge at her from the prisms, but only one was 
real. She countered the real one, slipped the sword past shield resistance to 
tap  the  target.  A  marker  light  came  alive:  red  and  glistening  among  the 
prisms … more distraction. 
Again  the  thing  attacked,  moving  at  one-marker  speed  now,  just  a  bit 
faster than it had at the beginning. 
She parried and, against all caution, moved into the danger zone, scored 
with the crysknife. 
Two lights glowed from the prisms. 
Again, the thing increased speed, moving out on its rollers, drawn like a 
magnet to the motions of her body and the tip of her sword. 
Attack—parry—counter. 
Attack—parry—counter … 
She had four lights alive in there now, and the thing was becoming more 
dangerous, moving faster with each light, o?ering more areas of confusion. 
Five lights. 
Sweat glistened on her naked skin. She existed now in a universe whose 
dimensions  were  outlined  by  the  threatening  blade,  the  target,  bare  feet 
against the practice ?oor, senses/nerves/muscles—motion against motion. 
Attack—parry—counter. 
Six lights … seven … 
Eight! 
She had never before risked eight. 
In a recess of her mind there grew a sense of urgency, a crying out against 
such wildness as this. The instrument of prisms and target could not think, 
feel  caution  or  remorse.  And  it  carried  a  real  blade.  To  go  against  less 
defeated the purpose of such training. That attacking blade could maim and 
it could kill. But the ?nest swordsmen in the Imperium never went against 
more than seven lights. 
Nine! 
Alia  experienced  a  sense  of  supreme  exaltation.  Attacking  blade  and 
target became blurs among blurs. She felt that the sword in her hand had 
come alive. She was an anti-target. She did not move the blade; it moved her. 
Ten! 
Eleven! 
Something ?ashed past her shoulder, slowed at the shield aura around the 
target, slid through and tripped the deactivating stud. The lights darkened. 
Prisms and target twisted their way to stillness. 
Alia whirled, angered by the intrusion, but her reaction was thrown into 
tension by awareness of the supreme ability which had hurled that knife. It 
had been a throw timed to exquisite nicety—just fast enough to get through 
the shield zone and not too fast to be de?ected. 
And it had touched a one-millimeter spot within an eleven-light target. 
Alia found her own emotions and tensions running down in a manner not 
unlike that of the target dummy. She was not at all surprised to see who had 
thrown the knife. 
Paul  stood  just  inside  the  training  room  doorway,  Stilgar  three  steps 
behind him. Her brother’s eyes were squinted in anger. 
Alia, growing conscious of her nudity, thought to cover herself, found the 
idea  amusing.  What  the  eyes  had  seen  could  not  be  erased.  Slowly,  she 
replaced the crysknife in its sheath at her neck. 
“I might’ve known,” she said. 
“I presume you know how dangerous that was,” Paul said. He took his 
time reading the reactions on her face and body: the ?ush of her exertions 
coloring  her  skin,  the  wet  fullness  of  her  lips.  There  was  a  disquieting 
femaleness about her that he had never considered in his sister. He found it 
odd that he could look at a person who was this close to him and no longer 
recognize  her  in  the  identity  framework  which  had  seemed  so  ?xed  and 
familiar. 
“That was madness,” Stilgar rasped, coming up to stand beside Paul. 
The words were angry, but Alia heard awe in his voice, saw it in his eyes. 
“Eleven lights,” Paul said, shaking his head. 
“I’d have made it twelve if you hadn’t interfered,” she said. She began to 
pale under his close regard, added: “And why do the damned things have 
that many lights if we’re not supposed to try for them?” 
“A  Bene  Gesserit  should  ask  the  reasoning  behind  an  open-ended 
system?” Paul asked. 
“I  suppose  you  never  tried  for  more  than  seven!”  she  said,  anger 
returning. His attentive posture began to annoy her. 
“Just  once,”  Paul  said.  “Gurney  Halleck  caught  me  on  ten.  My 
punishment was su?ciently embarrassing that I won’t tell you what he did. 
And speaking of embarrassment …” 
“Next  time,  perhaps  you’ll  have  yourselves  announced,”  she  said.  She 
brushed past Paul into the bedroom, found a loose gray robe, slipped into it, 
began  brushing  her  hair  before  a  wall  mirror.  She  felt  sweaty,  sad,  a 
postcoitum kind of sadness that left her with a desire to bathe once more … 
and to sleep. “Why’re you here?” she asked. 
“My  Lord,”  Stilgar  said.  There  was  an  odd  in?ection  in  his  voice  that 
brought Alia around to stare at him. 
“We’re here at Irulan’s suggestion,” Paul said, “as strange as that may 
seem. She believes, and information in Stil’s possession appears to con?rm it, 
that our enemies are about to make a major try for—” 
“My Lord!” Stilgar said, his voice sharper. 
As  her  brother  turned,  questioning,  Alia  continued  to  look  at  the  old 
Fremen Naib. Something about him now made her intensely aware that he 
was one of the primitives. Stilgar believed in a supernatural world very near 
him. It spoke to him in a simple pagan tongue dispelling all doubts. The 
natural universe in which he stood was ?erce, unstoppable, and it lacked the 
common morality of the Imperium. 
“Yes, Stil,” Paul said. “Do you want to tell her why we came?” 
“This isn’t the time to talk of why we came,” Stilgar said. 
“What’s wrong, Stil?” 
Stilgar continued to stare at Alia. “Sire, are you blind?” 
Paul turned back to his sister, a feeling of unease beginning to ?ll him. Of 
all his aides, only Stilgar dared speak to him in that tone, but even Stilgar 
measured the occasion by its need. 
“This one must have a mate!” Stilgar blurted. “There’ll be trouble if she’s 
not wed, and that soon.” 
Alia  whirled  away,  her  face  suddenly  hot.   How  did  he  touch  me?   she 
wondered.  Bene  Gesserit  self-control  had  been  powerless  to  prevent  her 
reaction. How had Stilgar done that? He hadn’t the power of the Voice. She 
felt dismayed and angry. 
“Listen to the great Stilgar!” Alia said, keeping her back to them, aware of 
a shrewish quality in her voice and unable to hide it. “Advice to maidens 
from Stilgar, the Fremen!” 
“As I love you both, I must speak,” Stilgar said, a profound dignity in his 
tone. “I did not become a chieftain among the Fremen by being blind to what 
moves men and women together. One needs no mysterious powers for this.” 
Paul weighed Stilgar’s meaning, reviewed what they had seen here and 
his  own  undeniable  male  reaction  to  his  own  sister.  Yes—there’d  been  a 
ruttish air about Alia, something wildly wanton. What had made her enter 
the practice ?oor in the nude? And risking her life in that foolhardy way! 
Eleven lights in the fencing prisms! That brainless automaton loomed in his 
mind with all the aspects of an ancient horror creature. Its possession was the 
shibboleth of this age, but it carried also the taint of old immorality. Once, 
they’d  been  guided  by  an  arti?cial  intelligence,  computer  brains.  The 
Butlerian Jihad had ended that, but it hadn’t ended the aura of aristocratic 
vice which enclosed such things. 
Stilgar was right, of course. They must ?nd a mate for Alia. 
“I will see to it,” Paul said. “Alia and I will discuss this later—privately.” 
Alia turned around, focused on Paul. Knowing how his mind worked, she 
realized she’d been the subject of a mentat decision, uncounted bits falling 
together in that human-computer analysis. There was an inexorable quality 
to  this  realization—a  movement  like  the  movement  of  planets.  It  carried 
something of the order of the universe in it, inevitable and terrifying. 
“Sire,” Stilgar said, “perhaps we’d—” 
“Not now!” Paul snapped. “We’ve other problems at the moment.” 
Aware that she dared not try to match logic with her brother, Alia put the 
past few moments aside, Bene Gesserit fashion, said: “Irulan sent you?” She 
found herself experiencing menace in that thought. 
“Indirectly,”  Paul  said.  “The  information  she  gives  us  con?rms  our 
suspicion that the Guild is about to try for a sandworm.” 
“They’ll try to capture a small one and attempt to start the spice cycle on 
some  other  world,”  Stilgar  said.  “It  means  they’ve  found  a  world  they 
consider suitable.” 
“It means they have Fremen accomplices!” Alia argued. “No o?worlder 
could capture a worm!” 
“That goes without saying,” Stilgar said. 
“No, it doesn’t,” Alia said. She was outraged by such obtuseness. “Paul, 
certainly you …” 
“The rot is setting in,” Paul said. “We’ve known that for quite some time. 
I’ve never 
 seen  this other world, though, and that bothers me. If they—” 
“ That  bothers you?” Alia demanded. “It means only that they’ve clouded 
its location with Steersmen the way they hide their sanctuaries.” 
Stilgar  opened  his  mouth,  closed  it  without  speaking.  He  had  the 
overwhelming sensation that his idols had admitted blasphemous weakness. 
Paul,  sensing  Stilgar’s  disquiet,  said:  “We’ve  an  immediate  problem!  I 
want your opinion, Alia. Stilgar suggests we expand our patrols in the open 
bled and reinforce the sietch watch. It’s just possible we could spot a landing 
party and prevent the—” 
“With a Steersman guiding them?” Alia asked. 
“They  are  desperate, aren’t they?” Paul agreed. “ That  is why I’m here.” 
“What’ve they  seen  that we haven’t?” Alia asked. 
“Precisely.” 
Alia  nodded,  remembering  her  thoughts  about  the  new  Dune  Tarot. 
Quickly, she recounted her fears. 
“Throwing a blanket over us,” Paul said. 
“With adequate patrols,” Stilgar ventured, “we might prevent the—” 
“We prevent nothing … forever,” Alia said. She didn’t like the  feel  of the 
way Stilgar’s mind was working now. He had narrowed his scope, eliminated 
obvious essentials. This was not the Stilgar she remembered. 
“We must count on their getting a worm,” Paul said. “Whether they can 
start the melange cycle on another planet is a di?erent question. They’ll need 
more than a worm.” 
Stilgar looked from brother to sister. Out of ecological thinking that had 
been ground into him by sietch life, he grasped their meaning. A captive 
worm couldn’t live except with a bit of Arrakis—sand plankton, Little Makers 
and all. The Guild’s problem was large, but not impossible. His own growing 
uncertainty lay in a di?erent area. 
“Then your visions do not detect the Guild at its work?” he asked. 
“Damnation!” Paul exploded. 
Alia studied Stilgar, sensing the savage sideshow of ideas taking place in 
his mind. He was hung on a rack of enchantment. Magic! Magic! To glimpse 
the  future  was  to  steal  terrifying  ?re  from  a  sacred  ?ame.  It  held  the 
attraction of ultimate peril, souls ventured and lost. One brought back from 
the  formless,  dangerous  distances  something  with  form  and  power.  But 
Stilgar was beginning to sense other forces, perhaps greater powers beyond 
that  unknown  horizon.  His  Queen  Witch  and  Sorcerer  Friend  betrayed 
dangerous weaknesses. 
‘Stilgar,” Alia said, ?ghting to hold him, “you stand in a valley between 
dunes. I stand on the crest. I see where you do not see. And, among other 
things, I see mountains which conceal the distances.” 
“There  are  things  hidden  from  you,”  Stilgar  said.  “This  you’ve  always 
said.” 
“All power is limited,” Alia said. 
“And danger may come from behind the mountains,” Stilgar said. 
“It’s  something  on that order,” Alia said. 
Stilgar  nodded,  his  gaze  fastened  on  Paul’s  face.  “But  whatever  comes 
from behind the mountains must cross the dunes.” 
The most dangerous game in the universe is to govern from an oracular base. 
We do not consider ourselves wise enough or brave enough to play that game. 
The measures detailed here for regulation in lesser matters are as near as we 
dare  venture  to  the  brink  of  government.  For  our  purposes,  we  borrow  a 
de?nition from the Bene Gesserit and we consider the various worlds as gene 
pools, sources of teachings and teachers, sources of the possible. Our goal is not 
to rule, but to tap these gene pools, to learn, and to free ourselves from all 
restraints imposed by dependency and government 
. 
—“The Orgy as a Tool of Statecraft,” Chapter Three of the The 
Steersman’s Guide 
“Is that where your father died?” Edric asked, sending a beam pointer 
from his tank to a jeweled marker on one of the relief maps adorning a wall 
of Paul’s reception salon. 
“That’s the shrine of his skull,” Paul said. “My father died a prisoner on a 
Harkonnen frigate in the sink below us.” 
“Oh, yes: I recall the story now,” Edric said. “Something about killing the 
old Baron Harkonnen, his mortal enemy.” Hoping he didn’t betray too much 
of the terror which small enclosures such as this room imposed upon him, 
Edric rolled over in the orange gas, directed his gaze at Paul, who sat alone 
on a long divan of striped gray and black. 
“My sister killed the Baron,” Paul said, voice and manner dry, “just before 
the battle of Arrakeen.” 
And why, he wondered, did the Guild man-?sh reopen old wounds in this 
place and at this time? 
The  Steersman  appeared  to  be  ?ghting  a  losing  battle  to  contain  his 
nervous  energies.  Gone  were  the  languid  ?sh  motions  of  their  earlier 
encounter. Edric’s tiny eyes jerked here … there, questing and measuring. 
The one attendant who had accompanied him in here stood apart near the 
line of houseguards ranging the end wall at Paul’s left. The attendant worried 
Paul—hulking, thicknecked , blunt and vacant face. The man had entered the 
salon,  nudging  Edric’s  tank  along  on  its  supporting  ?eld,  walking  with  a 
strangler’s gait, arms akimbo. 
Scytale , Edric had called him.  Scytale, an aide . 
The  aide’s  surface  shouted  stupidity,  but  the  eyes  betrayed  him.  They 
laughed at everything they saw. 
“Your concubine appeared to enjoy the performance of the Face Dancers,” 
Edric said. “It pleases me that I could provide that small entertainment. I 
particularly enjoyed her reaction to seeing her own features simultaneously 
repeated by the whole troupe.” 
“Isn’t there a warning against Guildsmen bearing gifts?” Paul asked. 
And  he  thought  of  the  performance  out  there  in  the  Great  Hall.  The 
dancers had entered in the costumes and guise of the Dune Tarot, ?inging 
themselves about in seemingly random patterns that devolved into ?re eddies 
and ancient prognostic designs. Then had come the rulers—a parade of kings 
and emperors like faces on coins, formal and sti? in outline, but curiously 
?uid. And the jokes: a copy of Paul’s own face and body, Chani repeated 
across the ?oor of the Hall, even Stilgar, who had grunted and shudddered 
while others laughed. 
“But our gifts have the kindest intent,” Edric protested. 
“How kindly can you be?” Paul asked. “The ghola you gave us believes he 
was designed to destroy us.” 
“Destroy you, Sire?” Edric asked, all bland attention. “Can one destroy a 
god?” 
Stilgar, entering on the last words, stopped, glared at the guards. They 
were much farther from Paul than he liked. Angrily he motioned them closer. 
“It’s all right, Stil,” Paul said, lifting a hand. “Just a friendly discussion. 
Why don’t you move the Ambassador’s tank over by the end of my divan?” 
Stilgar, weighing the order, saw that it would put the Steersman’s tank 
between Paul and the hulking aide, much too close to Paul, but … 
“It’s all right, Stil,” Paul repeated, and he gave the private hand-signal 
which made the order an imperative. 
Moving with obvious reluctance, Stilgar pushed the tank closer to Paul. 
He  didn’t  like  the  feel  of  the  container  or  the  heavily  perfumed  smell  of 
melange around it. He took up a position at the corner of the tank beneath 
the orbiting device through which the Steersman spoke. 
“To kill a god,” Paul said. “That’s very interesting. But who says I’m a 
god?” 
“Those who worship you,” Edric said, glancing pointedly at Stilgar. 
“Is this what you believe?” Paul asked. 
“What  I  believe  is  of  no  moment,  Sire,”  Edric  said.  “It  seems  to  most 
observers, however, that you conspire to make a god of yourself. And one 
might ask if that is something any mortal can do … safely?” 
Paul studied the Guildsman. Repellent creature, but perceptive. It was a 
question Paul had asked himself time and again. But he had seen enough 
alternate Timelines to know of worse possibilities than accepting godhead for 
himself. Much worse. These were not, however, the normal avenues for a 
Steersman to probe. Curious. Why had that question been asked? What could 
Edric  hope  to  gain  by  such  e?rontery?  Paul’s  thoughts  went 
  ?ick   (the 
association of Tleilaxu would be behind this move)— 
?ick  (the Jihad’s recent 
Sembou victory would bear on Edric’s action)— 
?ick  (various Bene Gesserit 
credos showed themselves here) 
 ?ick … 
A  process  involving  thousands  of  information  bits  poured  ?ickering 
through his computational awareness. It required perhaps three seconds. 
“Does  a  Steersman  question  the  guidelines  of  prescience?”  Paul  asked, 
putting Edric on the weakest ground. 
This disturbed the Steersman, but he covered well, coming up with what 
sounded like a long aphorism: “No man of intelligence questions the fact of 
prescience, Sire. Oracular vision has been known to men since most ancient 
times. It has a way of entangling us when we least suspect. Luckily, there are 
other forces in our universe.” 
“Greater than prescience?” Paul asked, pressing him. 
“If prescience alone existed and did everything, Sire, it would annihilate 
itself. Nothing but prescience? Where could it be applied except to its own 
degenerating movements?” 
“There’s always the human situation,” Paul agreed. 
“A  precarious  thing  at  best,”  Edric  said,  “without  confusing  it  by 
hallucinations.” 
“Are my visions no more than hallucinations?” Paul asked, mock sadness 
in his voice. “Or do you imply that my worshipers hallucinate?” 
Stilgar, sensing the mounting tensions, moved a step nearer Paul, ?xed 
his attention on the Guildsman reclining in the tank. 
“You twist my words, Sire,” Edric protested. An odd sense of violence lay 
suspended in the words. 
Violence here?  Paul wondered.  They wouldn’t dare! Unless  (and he glanced 
at his guards) 
 the forces which protected him were to be used in replacing him . 
“But you accuse me of conspiring to make a god of myself,” Paul said, 
pitching his voice that only Edric and Stilgar might hear. “Conspire?” 
“A poor choice of word, perhaps, my Lord,” Edric said. 
“But signi?cant,” Paul said. “It says you expect the worst of me.” 
Edric  arched  his  neck,  stared  sideways  at  Stilgar  with  a  look  of 
apprehension. “People always expect the worst of the rich and powerful, Sire. 
It is said one can always tell an aristocrat: he reveals only those of his vices 
which will make him popular.” 
A tremor passed across Stilgar’s face. 
Paul  looked  up  at  the  movement,  sensing  the  thoughts  and  angers 
whispering  in  Stilgar’s  mind.  How  dared  this  Guildsman  talk  thus  to 
Muad’Dib? 
“You’re not joking, of course,” Paul said. 
“Joking, Sire?” 
Paul grew aware of dryness in his mouth. He felt that there were too 
many people in this room, that the air he breathed had passed through too 
many lungs. The taint of melange from Edric’s tank felt threatening. 
“Who  might  my  accomplices  be  in  such  a  conspiracy?”  Paul  asked 
presently. “Do you nominate the Qizarate?” 
Edric’s  shrug  stirred  the  orange  gas  around  his  head.  He  no  longer 
appeared concerned by Stilgar, although the Fremen continued to glare at 
him. 
“Are you suggesting that my missionaries of the Holy Orders,  all of them , 
are preaching falsehood?” Paul insisted. 
“It could be a question of self-interest and sincerity,” Edric said. 
Stilgar put a hand to the crysknife beneath his robe. 
Paul shook his head, said: “Then you accuse me of insincerity.” 
“I’m not sure that  accuse  is the proper word, Sire.” 
The boldness of this creature!  Paul thought. And he said: “Accused or not, 
you’re saying my bishops and I are no better than power-hungry brigands.” 
“Power-hungry,  Sire?”  Again,  Edric  looked  at  Stilgar.  “Power  tends  to 
isolate  those  who  hold  too  much  of  it.  Eventually,  they  lose  touch  with 
reality … and fall.” 
“M’Lord,” Stilgar growled, “you’ve had men executed for less!” 
“Men, yes,” Paul agreed. “But this is a Guild Ambassador.” 
“He accuses you of an unholy fraud!” Stilgar said. 
“His  thinking  interests  me,  Stil,”  Paul  said.  “Contain  your  anger  and 
remain alert.” 
“As Muad’Dib commands.” 
“Tell  me,  Steersman,”  Paul  said,  “how  could  we  maintain  this 
hypothetical fraud over such enormous distances of space and time without 
the  means  to  watch  every  missionary,  to  examine  every  nuance  in  every 
Qizarate priory and temple?” 
“What is time to you?” Edric asked. 
Stilgar  frowned  in  obvious  puzzlement.  And  he  thought:   Muad’Dib  has 
often said he sees past the veils of time. What is the Guildsman really saying? 
“Wouldn’t the structure of such a fraud begin to show holes?’ Paul asked. 
“Signi?cant  disagreements,  schisms  …  doubts,  confessions  of  guilt—surely 
fraud could not suppress all these.” 
“What  religion  and  self-interest  cannot  hide,  governments  can,”  Edric 
said. 
“Are you testing the limits of my tolerance?” Paul asked. 
“Do my arguments lack all merit?” Edric countered. 
Does he want us to kill him?  Paul wondered.  Is Edric o?ering himself as a 
sacri?ce? 
“I prefer the cynical view,” Paul said, testing. “You obviously are trained 
in all the lying tricks of statecraft, the double meanings and the power words. 
Language  is  nothing  more  than  a  weapon  to  you  and,  thus,  you  test  my 
armor.” 
“The cynical view,” Edric said, a smile stretching his mouth. “And rulers 
are  notoriously  cynical  where  religions  are  concerned.  Religion,  too,  is  a 
weapon.  What  manner  of  weapon  is  religion  when  it  becomes  the 
government?” 
Paul felt himself go inwardly still, a profound caution gripping him. To 
whom was Edric speaking? Damnable clever words, heavy with manipulation 
leverages—that undertone of comfortable humor, the unspoken air of shared 
secrets: his manner said he and Paul were two sophisticates, men of a wider 
universe who understood things not granted common folk. With a feeling of 
shock, Paul realized that he had not been the main target for all this rhetoric. 
This a?iction visited upon the court had been speaking for the bene?t of 
others—speaking to Stilgar, to the household guards … perhaps even to the 
hulking aide. 
“Religious  mana  was thrust upon me,” Paul said. “I did not seek it.” And 
he  thought: 
  There!  Let  this  man-?sh  think  himself  victorious  in  our  battle  of 
words! 
“Then why have you not disavowed it, Sire?” Edric asked. 
“Because of my sister, Alia,” Paul said, watching Edric carefully. “She is a 
goddess.  Let me urge  caution where Alia is concerned lest  she strike  you 
dead with her glance.” 
A gloating smile began forming on Edric’s mouth, was replaced by a look 
of shock. 
“I am deadly serious,” Paul said, watching the shock spread, seeing Stilgar 
nod. 
In a bleak voice, Edric said: “You have mauled my con?dence in you, 
Sire. And no doubt that was your intent.” 
“Do  not  be  certain  you  know  my  intent,”  Paul  said,  and  he  signaled 
Stilgar that the audience was at an end. 
To Stilgar’s questioning gesture asking if Edric were to be assassinated, 
Paul gave a negative hand-sign, ampli?ed it with an imperative lest Stilgar 
take matters into his own hands. 
Scytale,  Edric’s  aide,  moved  to  the  rear  corner  of  the  tank,  nudged  it 
toward  the  door.  When  he  came  opposite  Paul,  he  stopped,  turned  that 
laughing gaze on Paul, said: “If my Lord permits?” 
“Yes, what is it?” Paul asked, noting how Stilgar moved close in answer to 
the implied menace from this man. 
“Some  say,”  Scytale  said,  “that  people  cling  to  Imperial  leadership 
because space is in?nite. They feel lonely without a unifying symbol. For a 
lonely people, the Emperor is a de?nite place. They can turn toward him and 
say: ‘See, there He is. He makes us one.’ Perhaps religion serves the same 
pupose, m’Lord.” 
Scytale nodded pleasantly, gave Edric’s tank another nudge. They moved 
out  of  the  salon,  Edric  supine  in  his  tank,  eyes  closed.  The  Steersman 
appeared spent, all his nervous energies exhausted. 
Paul stared after the shambling ?gure of Scytale, wondering at the man’s 
words. A peculiar fellow, that Scytale, he thought. While he was speaking, he 
had  radiated  a  feeling  of  many  people—as  though  his  entire  genetic 
inheritance lay exposed on his skin. 
“That was odd,” Stilgar said, speaking to no one in particular. 
Paul arose from the divan as a guard closed the door behind Edric and the 
escort. 
“Odd,” Stilgar repeated. A vein throbbed at his temple. 
Paul dimmed the salon’s lights, moved to a window which opened onto 
an angled cli? of his Keep. Lights glittered far below—pigmy movement. A 
work  gang  moved  down  there  bringing  giant  plasmeld  blocks  to  repair  a 
facade of Alia’s temple which had been damaged by a freak twisting of a 
sandblast wind. 
“That was a foolish thing, Usul, inviting that creature in these chambers,” 
Stilgar said. 
Usul , Paul thought.  My sietch name. Stilgar reminds me that he ruled over me 
once, that he saved me from the desert 
. 
“Why did you do it?” Stilgar asked, speaking from close behind Paul. 
“Data,” Paul said. “I need more data.” 
“Is it not dangerous to try meeting this threat  only  as a mentat?” 
That was perceptive , Paul thought. 
Mentat  computation  remained  ?nite.  You  couldn’t  say  something 
boundless within the boundaries of any language. Mentat abilities had their 
uses, though. He said as much now, daring Stilgar to refute his argument. 
“There’s always something outside,” Stilgar said. “Some things best  kept 
outside.” 
“Or inside,” Paul said. And he accepted for a moment his own oracular/ 
mentat summation. Outside, yes. And inside: here lay the true horror. How 
could he protect himself from himself? They certainly were setting him up to 
destroy himself, but this was a position hemmed in by even more terrifying 
possibilities. 
His  reverie  was  broken  by  the  sound  of  rapid  footsteps.  The  ?gure  of 
Korba the Qizara surged through the doorway backlighted by the brilliant 
illumination in the hallways. He entered as though hurled by an unseen force 
and  came  to  an  almost  immediate  halt  when  he  encountered  the  salon’s 
gloom. His hands appeared to be full of shigawire reels. They glittered in the 
light from the hall, strange little round jewels that were extinguished as a 
guardsman’s hand came into view, closed the door. 
“Is that you, m’Lord?” Korba asked, peering into the shadows. 
“What is it?” Stilgar asked. 
“Stilgar?” 
“We’re both here. What is it?” 
“I’m disturbed by this reception for the Guildsman.” 
“Disturbed?” Paul asked. 
“The people say, m’Lord, that you honor our enemies.” 
“Is that all?” Paul said. “Are those the reels I asked you to bring earlier?” 
He indicated the shigawire orbs in Korba’s hands. 
“Reels … oh! Yes, m’Lord. These are the histories. Will you view them 
here?” 
“I’ve viewed them. I want them for Stilgar here.” 
“For me?” Stilgar asked. He felt resentment grow at what he interpreted 
as caprice on Paul’s part. Histories! Stilgar had sought out Paul earlier to 
discuss  the  logistics  computations  for  the  Zabulon  conquest.  The  Guild 
Ambassador’s presence had intervened. And now—Korba with histories! 
“How  much  history  do  you  know?”  Paul  mused  aloud,  studying  the 
shadowy ?gure beside him. 
“M’Lord, I can name every world our people touched in their migrations. I 
know the reaches of Imperial …” 
“The Golden Age of Earth, have you ever studied that?” 
“Earth? Golden Age?” Stilgar was irritated and puzzled. Why would Paul 
wish  to  discuss  myths  from  the  dawn  of  time?  Stilgar’s  mind  still  felt 
crammed  with  Zabulon  data—computations  from  the  sta?  mentats:  two 
hundred  and  ?ve  attack  frigates  with  thirty  legions,  support  battalions, 
paci?cation cadres, Qizarate missionaries … the food requirements (he had 
the  ?gures  right  here  in  his  mind)  and  melange  …  weaponry,  uniforms, 
medals … urns for the ashes of the dead … the number of specialists—men 
to produce raw materials of propaganda, clerks, accountants … spies … and 
spies upon the spies … 
“I  brought  the  pulse-synchronizer  attachment,  also,  m’Lord,”  Korba 
ventured. He obviously sensed the tensions building between Paul and Stilgar 
and was disturbed by them. 
Stilgar shook his head from side to side.  Pulse-synchronizer?  Why would 
Paul wish him to use a mnemonic ?utter-system on a shigawire projector? 
Why  scan  for  speci?c  data  in  histories?  This  was  mentat  work!  As  usual, 
Stilgar found he couldn’t escape a deep suspicion at the thought of using a 
projector  and  attachments.  The  thing  always  immersed  him  in  disturbing 
sensations, an overwhelming shower of data which his mind sorted out later, 
surprising him with information he had not known he possessed. 
“Sire, I came with the Zabulon computations,” Stilgar said. 
“Dehydrate the Zabulon computations!” Paul snapped, using the obscene 
Fremen term which meant that here was moisture no man could demean 
himself by touching. 
“M’Lord!” 
“Stilgar,”  Paul  said,  “you  urgently  need  a  sense  of  balance  which  can 
come  only  from  an  understanding  of  long-term  e?ects.  What  little 
information  we  have  about  the  old  times,  the  pittance  of  data  which  the 
Butlerians left us, Korba has brought it for you. Start with the Genghis Khan.” 
“Genghis … Khan? Was he of the Sardaukar, m’Lord?” 
“Oh, long before that. He killed … perhaps four million.” 
“He must’ve had formidable weaponry to kill that many, Sire. Lasbeams, 
perhaps, or …” 
“He didn’t kill them himself, Stil. He killed the way I kill, by sending out 
his legions. There’s another emperor I want you to note in passing—a Hitler. 
He killed more than six million. Pretty good for those days.” 
“Killed … by his legions?” Stilgar asked. 
“Yes.” 
“Not very impressive statistics, m’Lord.” 
“Very good, Stil.” Paul glanced at the reels in Korba’s hands. Korba stood 
with them as though he wished he could drop them and ?ee. “Statistics: at a 
conservative estimate, I’ve killed sixty-one billion, sterilized ninety planets, 
completely demoralized ?ve hundred others. I’ve wiped out the followers of 
forty religions which had existed since—” 
“Unbelievers!” Korba protested. “Unbelievers all!” 
“No,” Paul said. “Believers.” 
“My Liege makes a joke,” Korba said, voice trembling. “The Jihad has 
brought ten thousand worlds into the shining light of—” 
“Into the darkness,” Paul said. “We’ll be a hundred generations recovering 
from  Muad’Dib’s  Jihad.  I  ?nd  it  hard  to  imagine  that  anyone  will  ever 
surpass this.” A barking laugh erupted from his throat. 
“What amuses Muad’Dib?” Stilgar asked. 
“I am not amused. I merely had a sudden vision of the Emperor Hitler 
saying something similar. No doubt he did.” 
“No other ruler ever had your powers,” Korba argued. “Who would dare 
challenge you? Your legions control the known universe and all the—” 
“The legions control,” Paul said. “I wonder if they know this?” 
“You control your legions, Sire,” Stilgar interrupted, and it was obvious 
from the tone of his voice that he suddenly felt his own position in that chain 
of command, his own hand guiding all that power. 
Having set Stilgar’s thoughts in motion along the track he wanted, Paul 
turned  his  full  attention  to  Korba,  said:  “Put  the  reels  down  here  on  the 
divan.” As Korba obeyed, Paul said: “How goes the reception, Korba? Does 
my sister have everything well in hand?” 
“Yes, m’Lord.” Korba’s tone was wary. “And Chani watches from the spy 
hole. She suspects there may be Sardaukar in the Guild entourage.” 
“No doubt she’s correct,” Paul said. “The jackals gather.” 
“Bannerjee,” Stilgar said, naming the chief of Paul’s Security detail, “was 
worried earlier that some of them might try to penetrate the private areas of 
the Keep.” 
“Have they?” 
“Not yet.” 
“But there was some confusion in the formal gardens,” Korba said. 
“What sort of confusion?” Stilgar demanded. 
Paul nodded. 
“Strangers  coming  and  going,”  Korba  said,  “trampling  the  plants, 
whispered conversations—I heard reports of some disturbing remarks.” 
“Such as?” Paul asked. 
“ Is this the way our taxes are spent?  I’m told the Ambassador himself asked 
that question.” 
“I don’t ?nd that surprising,” Paul said. “Were there many strangers in 
the gardens?” 
“Dozens, m’Lord.” 
“Bannerjee  stationed  picked  troopers  at  the  vulnerable  doors,  m’Lord,” 
Stilgar said. He turned as he spoke, allowing the salon’s single remaining 
light to illuminate half his face. The peculiar lighting, the face, all touched a 
node  of  memory  in  Paul’s  mind—something  from  the  desert.  Paul  didn’t 
bother bringing it to full recall, his attention being focused on how Stilgar 
had pulled back mentally. The Fremen had a tight-skinned forehead which 
mirrored almost every thought ?ickering across his mind. He was suspicious 
now, profoundly suspicious of his Emperor’s odd behavior. 
“I don’t like the intrusion into the gardens,” Paul said. “Courtesy to guests 
is one thing, and the formal necessities of greeting an envoy, but this …” 
“I’ll see to removing them,” Korba said. “Immediately.” 
“Wait!” Paul ordered as Korba started to turn. 
In the abrupt stillness of the moment, Stilgar edged himself into a position 
where he could study Paul’s face. It was deftly done. Paul admired the way of 
it, an achievement devoid of any forwardness. It was a Fremen thing: slyness 
touched by respect for another’s privacy, a movement of necessity. 
“What time is it?” Paul asked. 
“Almost midnight, Sire,” Korba said. 
“Korba, I think you may be my ?nest creation,” Paul said. 
“Sire!” There was injury in Korba’s voice. 
“Do you feel awe of me?” Paul asked. 
“You are Paul Muad’Dib who was Usul in our sietch,” Korba said. “You 
know my devotion to—” 
“Have you ever felt like an apostle?” Paul asked. 
Korba obviously misunderstood the words, but correctly interpreted the 
tone. “My emperor knows I have a clean conscience!” 
“Shai-hulud save us,” Paul murmured. 
The  questioning  silence  of  the  moment  was  broken  by  the  sound  of 
someone  whistling  as  he  walked  down  the  outer  hall.  The  whistling  was 
stilled by a guardsman’s barked command as it came opposite the door. 
“Korba,  I  think  you  may  survive  all  this,”  Paul  said.  And  he  read  the 
growing light of understanding on Stilgar’s face. 
“The strangers in the gardens, Sire?” Stilgar asked. 
“Ahh,  yes,”  Paul  said.  “Have  Bannerjee  put  them  out,  Stil.  Korba  will 
assist.” 
“Me, Sire?” Korba betrayed deep disquiet. 
“Some of my friends have forgotten they once were Fremen,” Paul said, 
speaking to Korba, but designing his words for Stilgar. “You will mark down 
the ones Chani identi?es as Sardaukar and you will have them killed. Do it 
yourself. I want it done quietly and without undue disturbance. We must 
keep in mind that there’s more to religion and government than approving 
treaties and sermons.” 
“I obey the orders of Muad’Dib,” Korba whispered. 
“The Zabulon computations?” Stilgar asked. 
“Tomorrow,” Paul said. “And when the strangers are removed from the 
gardens, announce that the reception is ended. The party’s over, Stil.” 
“I understand, m’Lord.” 
“I’m sure you do,” Paul said. 
Here lies a toppled god- 
His fall was not a small one . 
We did but build his pedestal , 
A narrow and a tall one . 
—Tleilaxu Epigram 
Alia crouched, resting elbows on knees, chin on ?sts, stared at the body on 
the dune—a few bones and some tattered ?esh that once had been a young 
woman. The hands, the head, most of the upper torso were gone—eaten by 
the coriolis wind. The sand all around bore the tracks of her brother’s medics 
and questors. They were gone now, all excepting the mortuary attendants 
who stood to one side with Hayt, the ghola, waiting for her to ?nish her 
mysterious perusal of what had been written here. 
A wheat-colored sky enfolded the scene in the glaucous light common to 
midafternoon for these latitudes. 
The  body  had  been  discovered  several  hours  earlier  by  a  low-?ying 
courier  whose  instruments  had  detected  a  faint  water  trace  where  none 
should be. His call had brought the experts. And they had learned—what? 
That  this  had  been  a  woman  of  about  twenty  years,  Fremen,  addicted  to 
semuta … and she had died here in the crucible of the desert from the e?ects 
of a subtle poison of Tleilaxu origin. 
To die in the desert was a common enough occurrence. But a Fremen 
addicted to semuta, this was such a rarity that Paul had sent her to examine 
the scene in the ways their mother had taught them. 
Alia felt that she had accomplished nothing here except to cast her own 
aura  of  mystery  about  a  scene  that  was  already  mysterious  enough.  She 
heard  the  ghola’s  feet  stir  the  sand,  looked  at  him.  His  attention  rested 
momentarily  upon  the  escort  ’thopters  circling  overhead  like  a  ?ock  of 
ravens. 
Beware of the Guild bearing gifts , Alia thought. 
The mortuary ’thopter and her own craft stood on the sand near a rock 
outcropping behind the ghola. Focusing on the grounded ’thopters ?lled Alia 
with a craving to be airborne and away from here. 
But Paul had thought she might see something here which others would 
miss. She squirmed in her stillsuit. It felt raspingly unfamiliar after all the 
suitless months of city life. She studied the ghola, wondering if he might 
know something important about this peculiar death. A lock of his black-goat 
hair, she saw, had escaped his stillsuit hood. She sensed her hand longing to 
tuck that hair back into place. 
As  though  lured  by  this  thought,  his  gleaming  gray  metal  eyes  turned 
toward her. The eyes set her trembling and she tore her gaze away from him. 
A Fremen woman had died here from a poison called “the throat of hell.” 
A Fremen addicted to semuta. 
She shared Paul’s disquiet at this conjunction. 
The  mortuary  attendants  waited  patiently.  This  corpse  contained  not 
enough water for them to salvage. They felt no need to hurry. And they’d 
believe that Alia, through some glyptic art, was reading a strange truth in 
these remains. 
No strange truth came to her. 
There was only a distant feeling of anger deep within her at the obvious 
thoughts in the attendants’ minds. It was a product of the damned religious 
mystery. She and her brother could not be 
 people . They had to be something 
more. The Bene Gesserit had seen to that by manipulating Atreides ancestry. 
Their  mother  had  contributed  to  it  by  thrusting  them  onto  the  path  of 
witchery. 
And Paul perpetuated the di?erence. 
The Reverend Mothers encapsulated in Alia’s memories stirred restlessly, 
provoking adab ?ashes of thought: 
 “Peace, Little One! You are what you are. 
There are compensations.” 
Compensations! 
She summoned the ghola with a gesture. 
He stopped beside her, attentive, patient. 
“What do you see in this?” she asked. 
“We may never learn who it was died here,” he said. “The head, the teeth 
are gone. The hands … Unlikely such a one had a genetic record somewhere 
to which her cells could be matched.” 
“Tleilaxu poison,” she said. “What do you make of that?” 
“Many people buy such poisons.” 
“True enough. And this ?esh is too far gone to be regrown as was done 
with your body.” 
“Even if you could trust the Tleilaxu to do it,” he said. 
She nodded, stood. “You will ?y me back to the city now.” 
When they were airborne and pointed north, she said: “You ?y exactly as 
Duncan Idaho did.” 
He cast a speculative glance at her. “Others have told me this.” 
“What are you thinking now?” she asked. 
“Many things.” 
“Stop dodging my question, damn you!” 
“Which question?” 
She glared at him. 
He saw the glare, shrugged. 
How like Duncan Idaho, that gesture, she thought. Accusingly, her voice 
thick and with a catch in it, she said: “I merely wanted your reactions voiced 
to play my own thoughts against them. That young woman’s death bothers 
me.” 
“I was not thinking about that.” 
“What were you thinking about?” 
“About the strange emotions I feel when people speak of the one I may 
have been.” 
“May have been?” 
“The Tleilaxu are very clever.” 
“Not that clever. You were Duncan Idaho.” 
“Very likely. It’s the prime computation.” 
“So you get emotional?” 
“To a degree. I feel eagerness. I’m uneasy. There’s a tendency to tremble 
and I must devote e?ort to controlling it. I get… ?ashes of imagery.” 
“What imagery?” 
“It’s too rapid to recognize. Flashes. Spasms … almost memories.” 
“Aren’t you curious about such memories?” 
“Of  course.  Curiosity  urges  me  forward,  but  I  move  against  a  heavy 
reluctance. I think: ‘What if I’m not the one they believe me to be?’ I don’t 
like that thought.” 
“And this is all you were thinking?” 
“You know better than that, Alia.” 
How dare he use my given name?  She felt anger rise and go down beneath 
the  memory  of  the  way  he’d  spoken:  softly  throbbing  undertones,  casual 
male con?dence. A muscle twitched along her jaw. She clenched her teeth. 
“Isn’t that El Kuds down there?” he asked, dipping a wing brie?y, causing 
a sudden ?urry in their escort. 
She looked down at their shadows rippling across the promontory above 
Harg  Pass,  at  the  cli?  and  the  rock  pyramid  containing  the  skull  of  her 
father.  El Kuds—the Holy Place . 
“That’s the Holy Place,” she said. 
“I  must  visit  that  place  one  day,”  he  said.  “Nearness  to  your  father’s 
remains may bring memories I can capture.” 
She saw suddenly how strong must be this need to know who he’d been. 
It was a central compulsion with him. She looked back at the rocks, the cli? 
with its base sloping into a dry beach and a sea of sand—cinnamon rock 
lifting from the dunes like a ship breasting waves. 
“Circle back,” she said. 
“The escort …” 
“They’ll follow. Swing under them.” 
He obeyed. 
“Do you truly serve my brother?” she asked, when he was on the new 
course, the escort following. 
“I serve the Atreides,” he said, his tone formal. 
And she saw his right hand lift, fall—almost the old salute of Caladan. A 
pensive look came over his face. She watched him peer down at the rock 
pyramid. 
“What bothers you?” she asked. 
His lips moved. A voice emerged, brittle, tight: “He was … he was …” A 
tear slid down his cheek. 
Alia  found  herself  stilled  by  Fremen  awe.  He  gave  water  to  the  dead! 
Compulsively, she touched a ?nger to his cheek, felt the tear. 
“Duncan,” she whispered. 
He appeared locked to the ’thopter controls, gaze fastened to the tomb 
below. 
She raised her voice: “Duncan!” 
He swallowed, shook his head, looked at her, the metal eyes glistening. “I 
… felt … an arm … on my shoulders,” he whispered. “I felt it! An arm.” His 
throat worked. “It was … a friend. It was … my friend.” 
“Who?” 
“I don’t know. I think it was … I don’t know.” 
The call light began ?ashing in front of Alia, their escort captain wanting 
to know why they returned to the desert. She took the microphone, explained 
that they had paid a brief homage to her father’s tomb. The captain reminded 
her that it was late. 
“We will go to Arrakeen now,” she said, replacing the microphone. 
Hayt took a deep breath, banked their ’thopter around to the north. 
“It was my father’s arm you felt, wasn’t it?” she asked. 
“Perhaps.” 
His voice was that of the mentat computing probabilities, and she saw he 
had regained his composure. 
“Are you aware of how I know my father?” she asked. 
“I have some idea.” 
“Let  me  make  it  clear,”  she  said.  Brie?y,  she  explained  how  she  had 
awakened to Reverend Mother awareness before birth, a terri?ed fetus with 
the knowledge of countless lives embedded in her nerve cells—and all this 
after the death of her father. 
“I know my father as my mother knew him,” she said. “In every last detail 
of every experience she shared with him. In a way, I am my mother. I have 
all her memories up to the moment when she drank the Water of Life and 
entered the trance of transmigration.” 
“Your brother explained something of this.” 
“He did? Why?” 
“I asked.” 
“Why?” 
“A mentat requires data.” 
“Oh.” She looked down at the ?at expanse of the Shield Wall—tortured 
rock, pits and crevices. 
He saw the direction of her gaze, said: “A very exposed place, that down 
there.” 
“But an easy place to hide,” she said. She looked at him. “It reminds me 
of a human mind … with all its concealments.” 
“Ahhh,” he said. 
“Ahhh? What does that mean—ahhh?” She was suddenly angry with him 
and the reason for it escaped her. 
“You’d like to know what my mind conceals,” he said. It was a statement, 
not a question. 
“How do you know I haven’t exposed you for what you are by my powers 
of prescience?” she demanded. 
“Have you?” He seemed genuinely curious. 
“No!” 
“Sibyls have limits,” he said. 
He appeared to be amused and this reduced Alia’s anger. “Amused? Have 
you no respect for my powers?” she asked. The question sounded weakly 
argumentative even to her own ears. 
“I  respect  your  omens  and  portents  perhaps  more  than  you  think,”  he 
said. “I was in the audience for your Morning Ritual.” 
“And what does that signify?” 
“You’ve great ability with symbols,” he said, keeping his attention on the 
’thopter’s controls. “That’s a Bene Gesserit thing, I’d say. But, as with many 
witches, you’ve become careless of your powers.” 
She felt a spasm of fear, blared: “How dare you?” 
“I dare much more than my makers anticipated,” he said. “Because of that 
rare fact, I remain with your brother.” 
Alia studied the steel balls which were his eyes: no human expression 
there. The stillsuit hood concealed the line of his jaw. His mouth remained 
?rm,  though.  Great  strength  in  it  …  and  determination.  His  words  had 
carried  a  reassuring  intensity.  “…  dare  much  more  …”  That  was  a  thing 
Duncan Idaho might have said. Had the Tleilaxu fashioned their ghola better 
than they knew—or was this mere sham, part of his conditioning? 
“Explain yourself, ghola,” she commanded. 
“Know thyself, is that thy commandment?” he asked. 
Again, she felt that he was amused. “Don’t bandy words with me, you … 
you 
 thing! ” she said. She put a hand to the crysknife in its throat sheath. 
“Why were you given to my brother?” 
“Your  brother  tells  me  that  you  watched  the  presentation,”  he  said. 
“You’ve heard me answer that question for him.” 
“Answer it again … for me!” 
“I am intended to destroy him.” 
“Is that the mentat speaking?” 
“You  knew  the  answer  to  that  without  asking,”  he  chided.  “And  you 
know, as well, that such a gift wasn’t necessary. Your brother already was 
destroying himself quite adequately.” 
She weighed these words, her hand remaining on the haft of her knife. A 
tricky answer, but there was sincerity in the voice. 
“Then why such a gift?” she probed. 
“It may have amused the Tleilaxu. And, it is true, that the Guild asked for 
me as a gift.” 
“Why?” 
“Same answer.” 
“How am I careless of my powers?” 
“How are you employing them?” he countered. 
His question slashed through to her own misgivings. She took her hand 
away from the knife, asked: “Why do you say my brother was destroying 
himself?” 
“Oh, come now, child! Where are these vaunted powers? Have you no 
ability to reason?” 
Controlling anger, she said: “Reason  for  me, mentat.” 
“Very well.” He glanced around at their escort, returned his attention to 
their  course.  The  plain  of  Arrakeen  was  beginning  to  show  beyond  the 
northern rim of the Shield Wall. The pattern of the pan and graben villages 
remained indistinct beneath a dust pall, but the distant gleam of Arrakeen 
could be discerned. 
“Symptoms,” he said. “Your brother keeps an o?cial Panegyrist who—” 
“Who was a gift of the Fremen Naibs!” 
“An odd gift from friends,” he said. “Why would they surround him with 
?attery and servility? Have you really listened to this Panegyrist? ‘ The people 
are  illuminated  by  Muad’Dib.  The  Umma  Regent,  our  Emperor,  came  out  of 
darkness to shine resplendently upon all men. He is our Sire. He is precious water 
from an endless fountain. He spills joy for all the universe to drink .’ Pah!” 
Speaking softly, Alia said: “If I but repeated your words for our Fremen 
escort, they’d hack you into bird feed.” 
“Then tell them.” 
“My brother rules by the natural law of heaven!” 
“You don’t believe that, so why say it?” 
“How do you know what I believe?” She experienced trembling that no 
Bene  Gesserit  powers  could  control.  This  ghola  was  having  an  e?ect  she 
hadn’t anticipated. 
“You commanded me to reason as a mentat,” he reminded her. 
“No  mentat  knows  what  I  believe!”  She  took  two  deep,  shuddering 
breaths. “How dare you judge us?” 
“Judge you? I don’t judge.” 
“You’ve no idea how we were taught!” 
“Both of you were taught to govern,” he said. “You were conditioned to 
an overweening thirst for power. You were imbued with a shrewd grasp of 
politics and a deep understanding for the uses of war and ritual. Natural law? 
What natural law? That myth haunts human history. Haunts! It’s a ghost. It’s 
insubstantial, unreal. Is your Jihad a natural law?” 
“Mentat jabber,” she sneered. 
“I’m a servant of the Atreides and I speak with candor,” he said. 
“Servant? We’ve no servants; only disciples.” 
“And I am a disciple of awareness,” he said. “Understand that, child, and 
you—” 
“Don’t call me child!” she snapped. She slipped her crysknife half out of 
its sheath. 
“I stand corrected.” He glanced at her, smiled, returned his attention to 
piloting the ’thopter. The cli?-sided structure of the Atreides Keep could be 
made  out  now,  dominating  the  northern  suburbs  of  Arrakeen.  “You  are 
something ancient in ?esh that is little more than a child,” he said. “And the 
?esh is disturbed by its new womanhood.” 
“I don’t know why I listen to you,” she growled, but she let the crysknife 
fall back into its sheath, wiped her palm on her robe. The palm, wet with 
perspiration, disturbed her sense of Fremen frugality. Such a waste of the 
body’s moisture! 
“You listen because you know I’m devoted to your brother,” he said. “My 
actions are clear and easily understood.” 
“Nothing  about  you  is  clear  and  easily  understood.  You’re  the  most 
complex creature I’ve ever seen. How do I know what the Tleilaxu built into 
you?” 
“By mistake or intent,” he said, “they gave me freedom to mold myself.” 
“You retreat into Zensunni parables,” she accused. “The wise man molds 
himself—the  fool  lives  only  to  die.”  Her  voice  was  heavy  with  mimicry. 
“Disciple of awareness!” 
“Men cannot separate means and enlightenment,” he said. 
“You speak riddles!” 
“I speak to the opening mind.” 
“I’m going to repeat all this to Paul.” 
“He’s heard most of it already.” 
She found herself overwhelmed by curiosity. “How is it you’re still alive… 
and free? What did he say?” 
“He  laughed.  And  he  said,  ‘People  don’t  want  a  bookkeeper  for  an 
Emperor; they want a master, someone who’ll protect them from change.’ 
But he agreed that destruction of his Empire arises from himself.” 
“Why would he say such things?” 
“Because I convinced him I understand his problem and will help him.” 
“What could you possibly have said to do that?” 
He  remained  silent,  banking  the  ’thopter  into  the  downwind  leg  for  a 
landing at the guard complex on the roof of the Keep. 
“I demand you tell me what you said!” 
“I’m not sure you could take it.” 
“I’ll be the judge of that! I command you to speak at once!” 
“Permit me to land us ?rst,” he said. And not waiting for her permission, 
he turned onto the base leg, brought the wings into optimum lift, settled 
gently onto the bright orange pad atop the roof. 
“Now,” Alia said. “Speak.” 
“I told him that to endure onself may be the hardest task in the universe.” 
She shook her head. “That’s … that’s …” 
“A bitter pill,” he said, watching the guards run toward them across the 
roof, taking up their escort positions. 
“Bitter nonsense!” 
“The greatest palatinate earl and the lowliest stipendiary serf share the 
same problem. You cannot hire a mentat or any other intellect to solve it for 
you. There’s no writ of inquest or calling of witnesses to provide answers. No 
servant—or disciple—can dress the wound. You dress it yourself or continue 
bleeding for all to see.” 
She whirled away from him, realizing in the instant of action what this 
betrayed  about  her  own  feelings.  Without  wile  of  voice  or  witch-wrought 
trickery, he had reached into her psyche once more. How did he do this? 
“What have you told him to do?” she whispered. 
“I told him to judge, to impose order.” 
Alia stared out at the guard, marking how patiently they waited—how 
orderly. “To dispense justice,” she murmured. 
“Not that!” he snapped. “I suggested that he judge, no more, guided by 
one principle, perhaps …” 
“And that?” 
“To keep his friends and destroy his enemies.” 
“To judge unjustly, then.” 
“What is justice? Two forces collide. Each may have the right in his own 
sphere.  And  here’s  where  an  Emperor  commands  orderly  solutions.  Those 
collisions he cannot prevent—he solves.” 
“How?” 
“In the simplest way: he decides.” 
“Keeping his friends and destroying his enemies.” 
“Isn’t that stability? People want order, this kind or some other. They sit 
in the prison of their hungers and see that war has become the sport of the 
rich. That’s a dangerous form of sophistication. It’s disorderly.” 
“I will suggest to my brother that you are much too dangerous and must 
be destroyed,” she said, turning to face him. 
“A solution I’ve already suggested,” he said. 
“And that’s why you are dangerous,” she said, measuring out her words. 
“You’ve mastered your passions.” 
“That  is   not   why  I’m  dangerous.”  Before  she  could  move,  he  leaned 
across, gripped her chin in one hand, planted his lips on hers. 
It was a gentle kiss, brief. He pulled away and she stared at him with a 
shock leavened by glimpses of spasmodic grins on the faces of her guardsmen 
still standing at orderly attention outside. 
Alia  put  a  ?nger  to  her  lips.  There’d  been  such  a  sense  of  familiarity 
about  that  kiss.  His  lips  had  been  ?esh  of  a  future  she’d  seen  in  some 
prescient byway. Breast heaving, she said: “I should have you ?ayed.” 
“Because I’m dangerous?” 
“Because you presume too much!” 
“I presume nothing. I take nothing which is not ?rst o?ered to me. Be 
glad I did not take all that was o?ered.” He opened his door, slid out. “Come 
along.  We’ve  dallied  too  long  on  a  fool’s  errand.”  He  strode  toward  the 
entrance dome beyond the pad. 
Alia leaped out, ran to match his stride. “I’ll tell him everything you’ve 
said and everything you did,” she said. 
“Good.” He held the door for her. 
“He will order you executed,” she said, slipping into the dome. 
“Why? Because I took the kiss I wanted?” He followed her, his movement 
forcing her back. The door slid closed behind him. 
“The kiss  you  wanted!” Outrage ?lled her. 
“All right, Alia. The kiss you wanted, then.” He started to move around 
her toward the drop ?eld. 
As though his movement had propelled her into heightened awareness, 
she realized his candor—the utter truthfulness of him. 
 The kiss I wanted , she 
told herself. 
 True . 
“Your truthfulness, that’s what’s dangerous,” she said, following him. 
“You return to the ways of wisdom,” he said, not breaking his stride. “A 
mentat could not’ve stated the matter more directly. Now: what is it you saw 
in the desert?” 
She grabbed his arm, forcing him to a halt. He’d done it again: shocked 
her mind into sharpened awareness. 
“I can’t explain it,” she said, “but I keep thinking of the Face Dancers. 
Why is that?” 
“That is why your brother sent you to the desert,” he said, nodding. “Tell 
him of this persistent thought.” 
“But why?” She shook her head. “Why Face Dancers?” 
“There’s a young woman dead out there,” he said. “Perhaps no young 
woman is reported missing among the Fremen.” 
I think what a joy it is to be alive, and I wonder if I’ll ever leap inward to the 
root of this ?esh and know myself as once I was. The root is there. Whether any 
act of mine can ?nd it, that remains tangled in the future. But all things a man 
can do are mine. Any act of mine may do it 
. 
—The Ghola Speaks Alia’s Commentary 
As  he  lay  immersed  in  the  screaming  odor  of  the  spice,  staring  inward 
through the oracular trance, Paul saw the moon become an elongated sphere. 
It rolled and twisted, hissing—the terrible hissing of a star being quenched in 
an in?nite sea—down … down … down … like a ball thrown by a child. 
It was gone. 
This moon had not set. Realization engulfed him. It was gone: no moon. 
The earth quaked like an animal shaking its skin. Terror swept over him. 
Paul jerked upright on his pallet, eyes wide open, staring. Part of him 
looked  outward,  part  inward.  Outwardly,  he  saw  the  plasmeld  grillwork 
which vented his private room, and he knew he lay beside a stonelike abyss 
of his Keep. Inwardly, he continued to see the moon fall. 
Out! Out! 
His grillwork of plasmeld looked onto the blazing light of noon across 
Arrakeen. Inward—there lay blackest night. A shower of sweet odors from a 
garden roof nibbled at his senses, but no ?oral perfume could roll back that 
fallen moon. 
Paul swung his feet to the cold surface of the ?oor, peered through the 
grillwork.  He  could  see  directly  across  to  the  gentle  arc  of  a  footbridge 
constructed  of  crystal-stabilized  gold  and  platinum.  Fire  jewels  from  far 
Cedon decorated the bridge. It led to the galleries of the inner city across a 
pool and fountain ?lled with water?owers. If he stood, Paul knew, he could 
look down into petals as clean and red as fresh blood whirling, turning there 
—disks of ambient color tossed on an emerald freshet. 
His eyes absorbed the scene without pulling him from spice thralldom. 
That terrible vision of a lost moon . 
The vision suggested a monstrous loss of individual security. Perhaps he’d 
seen his civilization fall, toppled by its own pretensions. 
A moon … a moon … a falling moon . 
It had taken a massive dose of the spice essence to penetrate the mud 
thrown up by the tarot. All it had shown him was a falling moon and the 
hateful way he’d known from the beginning. To buy an end for the Jihad, to 
silence the volcano of butchery, he must discredit himself. 
Disengage … disengage … disengage … 
Floral perfume from the garden roof reminded him of Chani. He longed 
for her arms now, for the clinging arms of love and forgetfulness. But even 
Chani could not exorcise this vision. What would Chani say if he went to her 
with the statement that he had a particular death in mind? Knowing it to be 
inevitable,  why  not  choose  an  aristocrat’s  death,  ending  life  on  a  secret 
?ourish, squandering any years that might have been? To die before coming 
to the end of willpower, was that not an aristocrat’s choice? 
He stood, crossed to the lapped opening in the grillwork, went out onto a 
balcony which looked upward to ?owers and vines trailing from the garden. 
His mouth held the dryness of a desert march. 
Moon … moon—where is that moon? 
He thought of Alia’s description, the young woman’s body found in the 
dunes. A Fremen addicted to semuta! Everything ?tted the hateful pattern. 
You do not take from this universe , he thought.  It grants what it will . 
The remains of a conch shell from the seas of Mother Earth lay on a low 
table beside the balcony rail. He took its lustrous smoothness into his hands, 
tried to feel backward in Time. The pearl surface re?ected glittering moons 
of light. He tore his gaze from it, peered upward past the garden to a sky 
become a con?agration—trails of rainbow dust shining in the silver sun. 
My Fremen call themselves “Children of the moon,”  he thought. 
He  put  down  the  conch,  strode  along  the  balcony.  Did  that  terrifying 
moon  hold  out  hope  of  escape?  He  probed  for  meaning  in  the  region  of 
mystic communion. He felt weak, shaken, still gripped by the spice. 
At the north end of his plasmeld chasm, he came in sight of the lower 
buildings of the government warren. Foot tra?c thronged the roof walks. He 
felt that the people moved there like a frieze against a background of doors, 
walls, tile designs. The people were tiles! When he blinked, he could hold 
them frozen in his mind. A frieze. 
A moon falls and is gone . 
A feeling came over him that the city out there had been translated into 
an odd symbol for his universe. The buildings he could see had been erected 
on the plain where his Fremen had obliterated the Sardaukar legions. Ground 
once trampled by battles rang now to the rushing clamor of business. 
Keeping to the balcony’s outer edge, Paul strode around the corner. Now, 
his vista was a suburb where city structures lost themselves in rocks and the 
blowing sand of the desert. Alia’s temple dominated the foreground; green 
and black hangings along its two-thousand-meter sides displayed the moon 
symbol of Muad’Dib. 
A falling moon . 
Paul passed a hand across his forehead and eyes. The symbol-metropolis 
oppressed him. He despised his own thoughts. Such vacillation in another 
would have aroused his anger. 
He loathed his city! 
Rage  rooted  in  boredom  ?ickered  and  simmered  deep  within  him, 
nurtured by decisions that couldn’t be avoided. He knew which path his feet 
must follow. He’d seen it enough times, hadn’t he? 
 Seen  it! Once … long ago, 
he’d thought of himself as an inventor of government. But the invention had 
fallen into old patterns. It was like some hideous contrivance with plastic 
memory.  Shape  it  any  way  you  wanted,  but  relax  for  a  moment,  and  it 
snapped into the ancient forms. Forces at work beyond his reach in human 
breasts eluded and de?ed him. 
Paul stared out across the rooftops. What treasures of untrammeled life 
lay  beneath  those  roofs?  He  glimpsed  leaf-green  places,  open  plantings 
amidst the chalk-red and gold of the roofs. Green, the gift of Muad’Dib and 
his water. Orchards and groves lay within his view—open plantings to rival 
those of fabled Lebanon. 
“Muad’Dib spends water like a madman,” Fremen said. 
Paul put his hands over his eyes. 
The moon fell . 
He  dropped  his  hands,  stared  at  his  metropolis  with  clari?ed  vision. 
Buildings  took  on  an  aura  of  monstrous  imperial  barbarity.  They  stood 
enormous and bright beneath the northern sun. Colossi! Every extravagance 
of  architecture  a  demented  history  could  produce  lay  within  his  view: 
terraces of mesa proportion, squares as large as some cities, parks, premises, 
bits of cultured wilderness. 
Superb  artistry  abutted  inexplicable  prodigies  of  dismal  tastelessness. 
Details  impressed  themselves  upon  him:  a  postern  out  of  most  ancient 
Baghdad … a dome dreamed in mythical Damascus … an arch from the low 
gravity of Atar … harmonious elevations and queer depths. All created an 
e?ect of unrivaled magni?cence. 
A moon! A moon! A moon! 
Frustration tangled him. He felt the pressure of mass-unconscious, that 
burgeoning sweep of humankind across his universe. They rushed upon him 
with a force like a gigantic tidal bore. He sensed the vast migrations at work 
in human a?airs: eddies, currents, gene ?ows. No dams of abstinence, no 
seizures of impotence nor maledictions could stop it. 
Muad’Dib’s Jihad was less than an eye-blink in this larger movement. The 
Bene Gesserit swimming in this tide, that corporate entity trading in genes, 
was  trapped  in  the  torrent  as  he  was.  Visions  of  a  falling  moon  must  be 
measured against other legends, other visions in a universe where even the 
seemingly eternal stars waned, ?ickered, died … 
What mattered a single moon in such a universe? 
Far within his fortress citadel, so deep within that the sound sometimes 
lost itself in the ?ow of city noises, a ten-string rebaba tinkled with a song of 
the Jihad, a lament for a woman left behind on Arrakis: 
Her hips are dunes curved by the wind , 
Her eyes shine like summer heat . 
Two braids of hair hang down her back- 
Rich with water rings, her hair! 
My hands remember her skin , 
Fragrant as amber, ?ower-scented . 
Eyelids tremble with memories … 
I am stricken by love’s white ?ame! 
The song sickened him. A tune for stupid creatures lost in sentimentality! 
As well sing to the dune-impregnated corpse Alia had seen. 
A ?gure moved in shadows of the balcony’s grillwork. Paul whirled. 
The ghola emerged into the sun’s full glare. His metal eyes glittered. 
“Is it Duncan Idaho or the man called Hayt?” Paul asked. 
The ghola came to a stop two paces from him. “Which would my Lord 
prefer?” 
The voice carried a soft ring of caution. 
“Play the Zensunni,” Paul said bitterly.  Meanings within meanings!  What 
could  a  Zensunni  philosopher  say  or  do  to  change  one  jot  of  the  reality 
unrolling before them at this instant? 
“My Lord is troubled.” 
Paul turned away, stared at the Shield Wall’s distant scarp, saw wind- 
carved arches and buttresses, terrible mimicry of his city. Nature playing a 
joke on him!  See what I can build!  He recognized a slash in the distant massif, 
a place where sand spilled from a crevasse, and thought: 
 There! Right there, 
we fought Sardaukar! 
“What troubles my Lord?” the ghola asked. 
“A vision,” Paul whispered. 
“Ahhhhh,  when  the  Tleilaxu  ?rst  awakened  me,  I  had  visions.  I  was 
restless,  lonely  …  not  really  knowing  I  was  lonely.  Not  then.  My  visions 
revealed nothing! The Tleilaxu told me it was an intrusion of the ?esh which 
men and gholas all su?er, a sickness, no more.” 
Paul turned, studied the ghola’s eyes, those pitted, steely balls without 
expression. What visions did those eyes see? 
“Duncan … Duncan …” Paul whispered. 
“I am called Hayt.” 
“I saw a moon fall,” Paul said. “It was gone, destroyed. I heard a great 
hissing. The earth shook.” 
“You are drunk on too much time,” the ghola said. 
“I ask for the Zensunni and get the mentat!” Paul said. “Very well! Play 
my vision through your logic, mentat. Analyze it and reduce it to mere words 
laid out for burial.” 
“Burial, indeed,” the ghola said. “You run from death. You strain at the 
next  instant,  refuse  to  live  here  and  now.  Augury!  What  a  crutch  for  an 
Emperor!” 
Paul found himself fascinated by a well-remembered mole on the ghola’s 
chin. 
“Trying to live in this future,” the ghola said, “do you give substance to 
such a future? Do you make it real?” 
“If I go the way of my vision-future, I’ll be alive  then,”  Paul muttered. 
“What makes you think I want to live there?” 
The ghola shrugged. “You asked me for a substantial answer.” 
“Where is there substance in a universe composed of events?” Paul asked. 
“Is there a ?nal answer? Doesn’t each solution produce new questions?” 
“You’ve digested so much time you have delusions of immortality,” the 
ghola said. “Even 
 your  Empire, my Lord, must live its time and die.” 
“Don’t  parade  smoke-blackened  altars  before  me,”  Paul  growled.  “I’ve 
heard enough sad histories of gods and messiahs. Why should I need special 
powers to forecast ruins of my own like all those others? The lowliest servant 
of my kitchens could do this.” He shook his head. “The moon fell!” 
“You’ve not brought your mind to rest at its beginning,” the ghola said. 
“Is  that  how  you  destroy  me?”  Paul  demanded.  “Prevent  me  from 
collecting my thoughts?” 
“Can  you  collect  chaos?”  the  ghola  asked.  “We  Zensunni  say:  ‘Not 
collecting,  that  is  the  ultimate  gathering.’  What  can  you  gather  without 
gathering yourself?” 
“I’m deviled by a vision and you spew nonsense!” Paul raged. “What do 
you know of prescience?” 
“I’ve seen the oracle at work,” the ghola said. “I’ve seen those who seek 
signs and omens for their individual destiny. They fear what they seek.” 
“My falling moon is real,” Paul whispered. He took a trembling breath. “It 
moves. It moves.” 
“Men always fear things which move by themselves,” the ghola said. “You 
fear your own powers. Things fall into your head from nowhere. When they 
fall out, where do they go?” 
“You comfort me with thorns,” Paul growled. 
An  inner  illumination  came  over  the  ghola’s  face.  For  a  moment,  he 
became pure Duncan Idaho. “I give you what comfort I can,” he said. 
Paul wondered at that momentary spasm. Had the ghola felt grief which 
his mind rejected? Had Hayt put down a vision of his own? 
“My moon has a name,” Paul whispered. 
He let the vision ?ow over him then. Though his whole being shrieked, 
no sound escaped him. He was afraid to speak, fearful that his voice might 
betray him. The air of this terrifying future was thick with Chani’s absence. 
Flesh that had cried in ecstasy, eyes that had burned him with their desire, 
the voice that had charmed him because it played no tricks of subtle control 
—all gone, back into the water and the sand. 
Slowly, Paul turned away, looked out at the present and the plaza before 
Alia’s temple. Three shaven-headed pilgrims entered from the processional 
avenue. They wore grimy yellow robes and hurried with their heads bent 
against the afternoon’s wind. One walked with a limp, dragging his left foot. 
They beat their way against the wind, rounded a corner and were gone from 
his sight. 
Just as his moon would go, they were gone. Still, his vision lay before 
him. Its terrible purpose gave him no choice. 
The ?esh surrenders itself , he thought.  Eternity takes back its own. Our bodies 
stirred these waters brie?y, danced with a certain intoxication before the love of 
life and self dealt with a few strange ideas, then submitted to the instruments of 
Time. What can we say of this? I occurred. I am not… yet, I occurred 
. 
“You do not beg the sun for mercy.” 
—Muad’Dib’s Travail from The Stilgar Commentary 
One moment of incompetence can be fatal, the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen 
Mohiam reminded herself. 
She  hobbled  along,  apparently  unconcerned,  within  a  ring  of  Fremen 
guards. One of those behind her, she knew, was a deaf-mute immune to any 
wiles  of  Voice.  No  doubt  he’d  been  charged  to  kill  her  at  the  slightest 
provocation. 
Why  had  Paul  summoned  her?  she  wondered.  Was  he  about  to  pass 
sentence? She remembered the day long ago when she’d tested him … the 
child Kwisatz Haderach. He was a deep one. 
Damn his mother for all eternity! It was her fault the Bene Gesserit had 
lost their hold on this gene line. 
Silence surged along the vaulted passages ahead of her entourage. She 
sensed the word being passed. Paul would hear the silence. He’d know of her 
coming before it was announced. She didn’t delude herself with ideas that 
her powers exceeded his. 
Damn him! 
She begrudged the burdens age had imposed on her: the aching joints, 
responses  not  as  quick  as  once  they’d  been,  muscles  not  as  elastic  as  the 
whipcords of her youth. A long day lay behind her and a long life. She’d 
spent this day with the Dune Tarot in a fruitless search for some clue to her 
own fate. But the cards were sluggish. 
The  guards  herded  her  around  a  corner  into  another  of  the  seemingly 
endless vaulted passages. Triangular metaglass windows on her left gave a 
view upward to trellised vines and indigo ?owers in deep shadows cast by 
the afternoon sun. Tiles lay underfoot—?gures of water creatures from exotic 
planets. Water reminders everywhere. Wealth … riches. 
Robed  ?gures  passed  across  another  hall  in  front  of  her,  cast  covert 
glances at the Reverend Mother. Recognition was obvious in their manner— 
and tension. 
She kept her attention on the sharp hairline of the guard immediately in 
front: young ?esh, pink creases at the uniform collar. 
The  immensity  of  this  ighir  citadel  began  to  impress  her.  Passages  … 
passages … They passed an open doorway from which emerged the sound of 
timbur and ?ute playing soft, elder music. A glance showed her blue-in-blue 
Fremen  eyes  staring  from  the  room.  She  sensed  in  them  the  ferment  of 
legendary revolts stirring in wild genes. 
There lay the measure of her personal burden, she knew. A Bene Gesserit 
could  not  escape  awareness  of  the  genes  and  their  possibilities.  She  was 
touched by a feeling of loss: that stubborn fool of an Atreides! How could he 
deny the jewels of posterity within his loins? a Kwisatz Haderach! Born out 
of his time, true, but real—as real as his abomination of a sister … and there 
lay a dangerous unknown. A wild Reverend Mother spawned without Bene 
Gesserit inhibitions, holding no loyalty to orderly development of the genes. 
She shared her brother’s powers, no doubt—and more. 
The size of the citadel began to oppress her. Would the passages never 
end? The place reeked of terrifying physical power. No planet, no civilization 
in  all  human  history  had  ever  before  seen  such  man-made  immensity.  A 
dozen ancient cities could be hidden in its walls! 
They  passed  oval  doors  with  winking  lights.  She  recognized  them  for 
Ixian handiwork: pneumatic transport ori?ces. Why was she being marched 
all  this  distance,  then?  The  answer  began  to  shape  itself  in  her  mind:  to 
oppress her in preparation for this audience with the Emperor. 
A  small  clue,  but  it  joined  other  subtle  indications—the  relative 
suppression  and  selection  of  words  by  her  escort,  the  traces  of  primitive 
shyness in their eyes when they called her 
 Reverend Mother , the cold and 
bland,  essentially  odorless  nature  of  these  halls—all  combined  to  reveal 
much that a Bene Gesserit could interpret. 
Paul wanted something from her! 
She concealed a feeling of elation. A bargaining lever existed. It remained 
only to ?nd the nature of that lever and test its strength. Some levers had 
moved things greater than this citadel. A ?nger’s touch had been known to 
topple civilizations. 
The  Reverend  Mother  reminded  herself  then  of  Scytale’s  assessment: 
When a creature has developed into one thing, he will choose death rather than 
change into his opposite 
. 
The passages through which she was being escorted grew larger by subtle 
stages—tricks  of  arching,  graduated  ampli?cation  of  pillared  supports, 
displacement of the triangular windows by larger, oblong shapes. Ahead of 
her,  ?nally,  loomed  double  doors  centered  in  the  far  wall  of  a  tall 
antechamber. She sensed that the doors were 
 very  large, and was forced to 
suppress a gasp as her trained awareness measured out the true proportions. 
The doorway stood at least eighty meters high, half that in width. 
As she approached with her escort, the doors swung inward—an immense 
and  silent  movement  of  hidden  machinery.  She  recognized  more  Ixian 
handiwork. Through that towering doorway she marched with her guards 
into  the  Grand  Reception  Hall  of  the  Emperor  Paul  Atreides—“Muad’Dib, 
before  whom  all  people  are  dwarfed.”  Now,  she  saw  the  e?ect  of  that 
popular saying at work. 
As she advanced toward Paul on the distant throne, the Reverend Mother 
found  herself  more  impressed  by  the  architectural  subtleties  of  her 
surroundings  than  she  was  by  the  immensities.  The  space  was  large:  it 
could’ve housed the entire citadel of any ruler in human history. The open 
sweep of the room said much about hidden structural forces balanced with 
nicety. Trusses and supporting beams behind these walls and the faraway 
domed  ceiling  must  surpass  anything  ever  before  attempted.  Everything 
spoke of engineering genius. 
Without seeming to do so, the hall grew smaller at its far end, refusing to 
dwarf  Paul  on  his  throne  centered  on  a  dais.  An  untrained  awareness, 
shocked by surrounding proportions, would see him at ?rst as many times 
larger than his actual size. Colors played upon the unprotected psyche: Paul’s 
green throne had been cut from a single Hagar emerald. It suggested growing 
things  and,  out  of  the  Fremen  mythos,  re?ected  the  mourning  color.  It 
whispered that here sat he who could make you mourn—life and death in 
one  symbol,  a  clever  stress  of  opposites.  Behind  the  throne,  draperies 
cascaded in burnt orange, curried gold of Dune earth, and cinnamon ?ecks of 
melange.  To  a  trained  eye,  the  symbolism  was  obvious,  but  it  contained 
hammer blows to beat down the uninitiated. 
Time played its role here. 
The  Reverend  Mother  measured  the  minutes  required  to  approach  the 
Imperial  Presence  at  her  hobbling  pace.  You  had  time  to  be  cowed.  Any 
tendency toward resentment would be squeezed out of you by the unbridled 
power  which  focused  down  upon  your  person.  You  might  start  the  long 
march toward that throne as a human of dignity, but you ended the march as 
a gnat. 
Aides and attendants stood around the Emperor in a curiously ordered 
sequence—attentive household guardsmen along the draped back wall, that 
abomination, Alia, two steps below Paul and on his left hand; Stilgar, the 
Imperial lackey, on the step directly below Alia; and on the right, one step up 
from the ?oor of the hall, a solitary ?gure: the ?eshly revenant of Duncan 
Idaho, the ghola. She marked older Fremen among the guardsmen, bearded 
Naibs with stillsuit scars on their noses, sheathed crysknives at their waists, a 
few  maula  pistols,  even  some  lasguns.  Those  must  be  trusted  men,  she 
thought, to carry lasguns in Paul’s presence when he obviously wore a shield 
generator. She could see the shimmering of its ?eld around him. One burst of 
a lasgun into that ?eld and the entire citadel would be a hole in the ground. 
Her guard stopped ten paces from the foot of the dais, parted to open an 
unobstructed view of the Emperor. She noted now the absence of Chani and 
Irulan, wondered at it. He held no important audience without them, so it 
was said. 
Paul nodded to her, silent, measuring. 
Immediately, she decided to take the o?ensive, said: “So the great Paul 
Atreides deigns to see the one he banished.” 
Paul smiled wryly, thinking:  She knows I want something from her . That 
knowledge had been inevitable, she being who she was. He recognized her 
powers. The Bene Gesserit didn’t become Reverend Mothers by chance. 
“Shall we dispense with fencing?” he asked. 
Would it be this easy? she wondered. And she said: “Name the thing you 
want.” 
Stilgar stirred, cast a sharp glance at Paul. The Imperial lackey didn’t like 
her tone. 
“Stilgar wants me to send you away,” Paul said. 
“Not kill me?” she asked. “I would’ve expected something more direct 
from a Fremen Naib.” 
Stilgar scowled, said: “Often, I must speak otherwise than I think. That is 
called diplomacy.” 
“Then let us dispense with diplomacy as well,” she said. “Was it necessary 
to have me walk all that distance? I am an old woman.” 
“You had to be shown how callous I can be,” Paul said. “That way, you’ll 
appreciate magnanimity.” 
“You dare such gaucheries with a Bene Gesserit?” she asked. 
“Gross actions carry their own messages,” Paul said. 
She hesitated, weighed his words. So—he might yet dispense with her … 
grossly, obviously, if she … if she what? 
“Say what it is you want from me,” she muttered. 
Alia  glanced  at  her  brother,  nodded  toward  the  draperies  behind  the 
throne. She knew Paul’s reasoning in this, but disliked it all the same. Call it 
wild  prophecy:   She  felt  pregnant  with  reluctance  to  take  part  in  this 
bargaining. 
“You must be careful how you speak to me, old woman,” Paul said. 
He  called  me  old  woman  when  he  was  a  stripling ,  the  Reverend  Mother 
thought. 
 Does he remind me now of my hand in his past? The decision I made 
then, must I remake it here? 
 She felt the weight of decision, a physical thing 
that set her knees to trembling. Muscles cried their fatigue. 
“It was a long walk,” Paul said, “and I can see that you’re tired. We will 
retire to my private chamber behind the throne. You may sit there.” He gave 
a hand-signal to Stilgar, arose. 
Stilgar and the ghola converged on her, helped her up the steps, followed 
Paul through a passage concealed by the draperies. She realized then why he 
had greeted her in the hall: a dumb-show for the guards and Naibs. He feared 
them, then. And now—now, he displayed kindly benevolence, daring such 
wiles  on  a  Bene  Gesserit.  Or  was  it  daring?  She  sensed  another  presence 
behind, glanced back to see Alia following. The younger woman’s eyes held a 
brooding, baleful cast. The Reverend Mother shuddered. 
The private chamber at the end of the passage was a twenty-meter cube 
of  plasmeld,  yellow  glowglobes  for  light,  the  deep  orange  hangings  of  a 
desert stilltent around the walls. It contained divans, soft cushions, a faint 
odor of melange, crystal water ?agons on a low table. It felt cramped, tiny 
after the outer hall. 
Paul seated her on a divan, stood over her, studying the ancient face— 
steely teeth, eyes that hid more than they revealed, deeply wrinkled skin. He 
indicated a water ?agon. She shook her head, dislodging a wisp of gray hair. 
In a low voice, Paul said: “I wish to bargain with you for the life of my 
beloved.” 
Stilgar cleared his throat. 
Alia ?ngered the handle of the crysknife sheathed at her neck. 
The ghola remained at the door, face impassive, metal eyes pointed at the 
air above the Reverend Mother’s head. 
“Have you had a vision of my hand in her death?” the Reverend Mother 
asked. She kept her attention on the ghola, oddly disturbed by him. Why 
should she feel threatened by the ghola? He was a tool of the conspiracy. 
“I know what it is you want from me,” Paul said, avoiding her question. 
Then he only suspects , she thought. The Reverend Mother looked down at 
the tips of her shoes exposed by a fold of her robe. Black … black … shoes 
and robe showed marks of her con?nement: stains, wrinkles. She lifted her 
chin, met an angry glare in Paul’s eyes. Elation surged through her, but she 
hid the emotion behind pursed lips, slitted eyelids. 
“What coin do you o?er?” she asked. 
“You may have my seed, but not my person,” Paul said. “Irulan banished 
and inseminated by arti?cial—” 
“You dare!” the Reverend Mother ?ared, sti?ening. 
Stilgar took a half step forward. 
Disconcertingly, the ghola smiled. And now Alia was studying him. 
“We’ll not discuss the things your Sisterhood forbids,” Paul said. “I will 
listen  to  no  talk  of  sins,  abominations  or  the  beliefs  left  over  from  past 
Jihads. You may have my seed for your plans, but no child of Irulan’s will sit 
on my throne.” 
“Your throne,” she sneered. 
“ My  throne.” 
“Then who will bear the Imperial heir?” 
“Chani.” 
“She is barren.” 
“She is with child.” 
An  involuntary  indrawn  breath  exposed  her  shock.  “You  lie!”  she 
snapped. 
Paul held up a restraining hand as Stilgar surged forward. 
“We’ve known for two days that she carries my child.” 
“But Irulan …” 
“By arti?cial means only. That’s my o?er.” 
The Reverend Mother closed her eyes to hide his face. Damnation! To cast 
the genetic dice in such a way! Loathing boiled in her breast. The teaching of 
the Bene Gesserit, the lessons of the Butlerian Jihad—all proscribed such an 
act. One did not demean the highest aspirations of humankind. No machine 
could function in the way of a human mind. No word or deed could imply 
that men might be bred on the level of animals. 
“Your decision,” Paul said. 
She shook her head. The genes, the precious Atreides genes—only these 
were  important.  Need  went  deeper  than  proscription.  For  the  Sisterhood, 
mating  mingled  more  than  sperm  and  ovum.  One  aimed  to  capture  the 
psyche. 
The Reverend Mother understood now the subtle depths of Paul’s o?er. 
He would make the Bene Gesserit party to an act which would bring down 
popular  wrath  …  were  it  ever  discovered.  They  could  not  admit  such 
paternity if the Emperor denied it. This coin might save the Atreides genes 
for the Sisterhood, but it would never buy a throne. 
She swept her gaze around the room, studying each face: Stilgar, passive 
and waiting now; the ghola frozen at some inward place; Alia watching the 
ghola … and Paul—wrath beneath a shallow veneer. 
“This is your only o?er?” she asked. 
“My only o?er.” 
She glanced at the ghola, caught by a brief movement of muscles across 
his cheeks. Emotion? “You, ghola,” she said. “Should such an o?er be made? 
Having been made, should it be accepted? Function as the mentat for us.” 
The metallic eyes turned to Paul. 
“Answer as you will,” Paul said. 
The  ghola  returned  his  gleaming  attention  to  the  Reverend  Mother, 
shocked her once more by smiling. “An o?er is only as good as the real thing 
it buys,” he said. “The exchange o?ered here is life-for-life, a high order of 
business.” 
Alia brushed a strand of coppery hair from her forehead, said: “And what 
else is hidden in this bargain?” 
The Reverend Mother refused to look at Alia, but the words burned in her 
mind. Yes, far deeper implications lay here. The sister was an abomination, 
true, but there could be no denying her status as a Reverend Mother with all 
the title implied. Gaius Helen Mohiam felt herself in this instant to be not 
one  single  person,  but  all  the  others  who  sat  like  tiny  congeries  in  her 
memory.  They  were  alert,  every  Reverend  Mother  she  had  absorbed  in 
becoming a Priestess of the Sisterhood. Alia would be standing in the same 
situation here. 
“What else?” the ghola asked. “One wonders why the witches of the Bene 
Gesserit have not used Tleilaxu methods.” 
Gaius Helen Mohiam and all the Reverend Mothers within her shuddered. 
Yes,  the  Tleilaxu  did  loathsome  things.  If  one  let  down  the  barriers  to 
arti?cial  insemination,  was  the  next  step  a  Tleilaxu  one—controlled 
mutation? 
Paul, observing the play of emotion around him, felt abruptly that he no 
longer  knew  these  people.  He  could  see  only  strangers.  Even  Alia  was  a 
stranger. 
Alia said: “If we set the Atreides genes adrift in a Bene Gesserit river, who 
knows what may result?” 
Gaius Helen Mohiam’s head snapped around, and she met Alia’s gaze. For 
a ?ashing instant, they were two Reverend Mothers together, communing on 
a single thought: 
 What lay behind any Tleilaxu action? The ghola was a Tleilaxu 
thing.  Had  he  put  this  plan  into  Paul’s  mind?  Would  Paul  attempt  to  bargain 
directly with the Bene Tleilax? 
She  broke  her  gaze  from  Alia’s,  feeling  her  own  ambivalence  and 
inadequacies. The pitfall of Bene Gesserit training, she reminded herself, lay 
in the powers granted: such powers predisposed one to vanity and pride. But 
power  deluded  those  who  used  it.  One  tended  to  believe  power  could 
overcome any barrier … including one’s own ignorance. 
Only  one  thing  stood  paramount  here  for  the  Bene  Gesserit,  she  told 
herself. That was the pyramid of generations which had reached an apex in 
Paul Atreides … and in his abomination of a sister. A wrong choice here and 
the pyramid would have to be rebuilt … starting generations back in the 
parallel  lines  and  with  breeding  specimens  lacking  the  choicest 
characteristics. 
Controlled mutation , she thought.  Did the Tleilaxu really practice it? How 
tempting! 
 She shook her head, the better to rid it of such thoughts. 
“You reject my proposal?” Paul asked. 
“I’m thinking,” she said. 
And again, she looked at the sister. The optimum cross for this female 
Atreides  had  been  lost  …  killed  by  Paul.  Another  possibility  remained, 
however—one  which  would 
  cement   the  desired  characteristic  into  an 
o?spring. Paul dared o?er animal breeding to the Bene Gesserit! How much 
was he really prepared to pay for his Chani’s life? Would he accept a cross 
with his own sister? 
Sparring  for  time,  the  Reverend  Mother  said:  “Tell  me,  oh  ?awless 
exemplar of all that’s holy, has Irulan anything to say of your proposal?” 
“Irulan will do what you tell her to do,” Paul growled. 
True enough , Mohiam thought. She ?rmed her jaw, o?ered a new gambit: 
“There are two Atreides.” 
Paul, sensing something of what lay in the old witch’s mind, felt blood 
darken his face. “Careful what you suggest,” he said. 
“You’d just  use  Irulan to gain your own ends, eh?” she asked. 
“Wasn’t she trained to be used?” Paul asked. 
And  we  trained  her,  that’s  what  he’s  saying ,  Mohiam  thought.   Well  … 
Irulan’s a divided coin. Was there another way to spend such a coin? 
“Will you put Chani’s child on the throne?” the Reverend Mother asked. 
“On  my  throne,” Paul said. He glanced at Alia, wondering suddenly if she 
knew the divergent possibilities in this exchange. Alia stood with eyes closed, 
an  odd  stillness-of-person  about  her.  With  what  inner  force  did  she 
commune? Seeing his sister thus, Paul felt he’d been cast adrift. Alia stood on 
a shore that was receding from him. 
The Reverend Mother made her decision, said: “This is too much for one 
person  to  decide.  I  must  consult  with  my  Council  on  Wallach.  Will  you 
permit a message?” 
As though she needed my permission!  Paul thought. 
He said: “Agreed, then. But don’t delay too long. I will not sit idly by 
while you debate.” 
“Will you bargain with the Bene Tleilax?” the ghola asked, his voice a 
sharp intrusion. 
Alia’s eyes popped open and she stared at the ghola as though she’d been 
awakened by a dangerous intruder. 
“I’ve made no such decision,” Paul said. “What I will do is go into the 
desert as soon as it can be arranged. Our child will be born in sietch.” 
“A wise decision,” Stilgar intoned. 
Alia refused to look at Stilgar. It was a wrong decision. She could feel this 
in every cell. Paul 
 must  know it. Why had he ?xed himself upon such a path? 
“Have  the  Bene  Tleilax  o?ered  their  services?”  Alia  asked.  She  saw 
Mohiam hanging on the answer. 
Paul shook his head. “No.” He glanced at Stilgar. “Stil, arrange for the 
message to be sent to Wallach.” 
“At once, m’Lord.” 
Paul turned away, waited while Stilgar summoned guards, left with the 
old  witch.  He  sensed  Alia  debating  whether  to  confront  him  with  more 
questions. She turned, instead, to the ghola. 
“Mentat,” she said, “will the Tleilaxu bid for favor with my brother?” 
The ghola shrugged. 
Paul felt his attention wander.  The Tleilaxu? No … not in the way Alia 
meant 
. Her question revealed, though, that she had not seen the alternatives 
here.  Well  …  vision  varied  from  sibyl  to  sibyl.  Why  not  a  variance  from 
brother  to  sister?  Wandering  …  wandering  …  He  came  back  from  each 
thought with a start to pick up shards of the nearby conversation. 
“… must know what the Tleilaxu …” 
“… the fullness of data is always …” 
“… healthy doubts where …” 
Paul turned, looked at his sister, caught her attention. He knew she would 
see tears on his face and wonder at them. Let her wonder. Wondering was a 
kindness now. He glanced at the ghola, seeing only Duncan Idaho despite the 
metallic  eyes.  Sorrow  and  compassion  warred  in  Paul.  What  might  those 
metal eyes record? 
There are many degrees of sight and many degrees of blindness , Paul thought. 
His mind turned to a paraphrase of the passage from the Orange Catholic 
Bible:  What senses do we lack that we cannot see another world all around us? 
Were those metal eyes another sense than sight? 
Alia crossed to her brother, sensing his utter sadness. She touched a tear 
on his cheek with a Fremen gesture of awe, said: “We must not grieve for 
those dear to us before their passing.” 
“Before  their  passing,”  Paul  whispered.  “Tell  me,  little  sister,  what  is 
before? ” 
“I’ve had a bellyful of the god and priest business! You think I don’t see my own 
mythos? Consult your data once more, Hayt. I’ve insinuated my rites into the 
most elementary human acts. The people eat in the name of Muad’Dib! They 
make love in my name, are born in my name—cross the street in my name. A 
roof  beam  cannot  be  raised  in  the  lowliest  hovel  of  far  Gangishree  without 
invoking the blessing of Muad’Dib!” 
—Book of Diatribes from the Hayt Chronicle 
“You risk much leaving your post and coming to me here at this time,” Edric 
said, glaring through the walls of his tank at the Face Dancer. 
“How weak and narrow is your thinking,” Scytale said. “Who is it who 
comes to visit you?” 
Edric hesitated, observing the hulk shape, heavy eyelids, blunt face. It 
was early in the day and Edric’s metabolism had not yet cycled from night 
repose into full melange consumption. 
“This is not the shape which walked the streets?” Edric asked. 
“One would not look twice at some of the ?gures I have been today,” 
Scytale said. 
The chameleon thinks a change of shape will hide him from anything , Edric 
thought with rare insight. And he wondered if his presence in the conspiracy 
truly hid them from all oracular powers. The Emperor’s sister, now … 
Edric shook his head, stirring the orange gas of his tank, said: “Why are 
you here?” 
“The gift must be prodded to swifter action,” Scytale said. 
“That cannot be done.” 
“A way must be found,” Scytale insisted. 
“Why?” 
“Things are not to my liking. The Emperor is trying to split us. Already he 
has made his bid to the Bene Gesserit.” 
“Oh,  that .” 
“That! You must prod the ghola to …” 
“You fashioned him, Tleilaxu,” Edric said. “You know better than to ask 
this.” He paused, moved closer to the transparent wall of his tank. “Or did 
you lie to us about this gift?” 
“Lie?” 
“You said the weapon was to be aimed and released, nothing more. Once 
the ghola was given we could not tamper.” 
“Any ghola can be disturbed,” Scytale said. “You need do nothing more 
than question him about his original being.” 
“What will this do?” 
“It will stir him to actions which will serve our purposes.” 
“He is a mentat with powers of logic and reason,” Edric objected. “He 
may guess what I’m doing … or the sister. If her attention is focused upon—” 
“Do you hide us from the sibyl or don’t you?” Scytale asked. 
“I’m not afraid of oracles,” Edric said. “I’m concerned with logic, with 
real spies, with the physical powers of the Imperium, with the control of the 
spice, with—” 
“One can contemplate the Emperor and his powers comfortably if one 
remembers that all things are ?nite,” Scytale said. 
Oddly, the Steersman recoiled in agitation, threshing his limbs like some 
weird  newt.  Scytale  fought  a  sense  of  loathing  at  the  sight.  The  Guild 
Navigator  wore  his  usual  dark  leotard  bulging  at  the  belt  with  various 
containers. Yet … he gave the impression of nakedness when he moved. It 
was the swimming, reaching movements, Scytale decided, and he was struck 
once  more  by  the  delicate  linkages  of  their  conspiracy.  They  were  not  a 
compatible group. That was weakness. 
Edric’s agitation subsided. He stared out at Scytale, vision colored by the 
orange  gas  which  sustained  him.  What  plot  did  the  Face  Dancer  hold  in 
reserve to save himself? Edric wondered. The Tleilaxu was not acting in a 
predictable fashion. Evil omen. 
Something  in  the  Navigator’s  voice  and  actions  told  Scytale  that  the 
Guildsman  feared  the  sister  more  than  the  Emperor.  This  was  an  abrupt 
thought ?ashed on the screen of awareness. Disturbing. Had they overlooked 
something important about Alia? Would the ghola be su?cient weapon to 
destroy both? 
“You know what is said of Alia?” Scytale asked, probing. 
“What do you mean?” Again, the ?sh-man was agitated. 
“Never have philosophy and culture had such a patroness,” Scytale said. 
“Pleaure and beauty unite in—” 
“What is enduring about beauty and pleasure?” Edric demanded. “We will 
destroy  both  Atreides.  Culture!  They  dispense  culture  the  better  to  rule. 
Beauty!  They  promote  the  beauty  which  enslaves.  They  create  a  literate 
ignorance—easiest  thing  of  all.  They  leave  nothing  to  chance.  Chains! 
Everything they do forges chains, enslaves. But slaves always revolt.” 
“The sister may wed and produce o?spring,” Scytale said. 
“Why do you speak of the sister?” Edric asked. 
“The Emperor may choose a mate for her,” Scytale said. 
“Let him choose. Already, it is too late.” 
“Even you cannot invent the next moment,” Scytale warned. “You are not 
a  creator  …  any  more  than  are  the  Atreides.”  He  nodded.  “We  must  not 
presume too much.” 
“We aren’t the ones to ?ap our tongues about creation,” Edric protested. 
“We aren’t the rabble trying to make a messiah out of Muad’Dib. What is this 
nonsense? Why are you raising such questions?” 
“It’s this planet,” Scytale said. “  raises questions.” It 
“Planets don’t speak!” 
“This one does.” 
“Oh?” 
“It speaks of creation. Sand blowing in the night, that is creation.” 
“Sand blowing …” 
“When you awaken, the ?rst light shows you the new world—all fresh 
and ready for your tracks.” 
Untracked  sand?   Edric  thought.   Creation?   He  felt  knotted  with  sudden 
anxiety.  The  con?nement  of  his  tank,  the  surrounding  room,  everything 
closed in upon him, constricted him. 
Tracks in sand . 
“You talk like a Fremen,” Edric said. 
“This  is  a  Fremen  thought  and  it’s  instructive,”  Scytale  agreed.  “They 
speak of Muad’Dib’s Jihad as leaving tracks in the universe in the same way 
that a Fremen tracks new sand. They’ve marked out a trail in men’s lives.” 
“So?” 
“Another night comes,” Scytale said. “Winds blow.” 
“Yes,” Edric said, “the Jihad is ?nite. Muad’Dib has used his Jihad and—” 
“He didn’t use the Jihad,” Scytale said. “The Jihad used him. I think he 
would’ve stopped it if he could.” 
“If he could? All he had to do was—” 
“Oh, be still!” Scytale barked. “You can’t stop a mental epidemic. It leaps 
from  person  to  person  across  parsecs.  It’s  overwhelmingly  contagious.  It 
strikes at the unprotected side, in the place where we lodge the fragments of 
other  such  plagues.  Who  can  stop  such  a  thing?  Muad’Dib  hasn’t  the 
antidote. The thing has roots in chaos. Can orders reach there?” 
“Have  you  been  infected,  then?”  Edric  asked.  He  turned  slowly  in  the 
orange gas, wondering why Scytale’s words carried such a tone of fear. Had 
the Face Dancer broken from the conspiracy? There was no way to peer into 
the future and examine this now. The future had become a muddy stream, 
clogged with prophets. 
“We’re  all  contaminated,”  Scytale  said,  and  he  reminded  himself  that 
Edric’s intelligence had severe limits. How could this point be made so that 
the Guildsman would understand it? 
“But when we destroy him,” Edric said, “the contag—” 
“I should leave you in this ignorance,” Scytale said. “But my duties will 
not permit it. Besides, it’s dangerous to all of us.” 
Edric recoiled, steadied himself with a kick of one webbed foot which 
sent the orange gas whipping around his legs. “You speak strangely,” he said. 
“This whole thing is explosive,” Scytale said in a calmer voice. “It’s ready 
to shatter. When it goes, it will send bits of itself out through the centuries. 
Don’t you see this?” 
“We’ve dealt with religions before,” Edric protested. “If this new—” 
“It  is   not   just  a  religion!”  Scytale  said,  wondering  what  the  Reverend 
Mother  would  say  to  this  harsh  education  of  their  fellow  conspirator. 
“Religious government is something else. Muad’Dib has crowded his Qizarate 
in  everywhere,  displaced  the  old  functions  of  government.  But  he  has  no 
permanent civil service, no interlocking embassies. He has bishoprics, islands 
of authority. At the center of each island is a man. Men learn how to gain 
and hold personal power. Men are jealous.” 
“When they’re divided, we’ll absorb them one by one,” Edric said with a 
complacent smile. “Cut o? the head and the body will fall to—” 
“This body has two heads,” Scytale said. 
“The sister … who may wed.” 
“Who will certainly wed.” 
“I don’t like your tone, Scytale.” 
“And I don’t like your ignorance.” 
“What if she does wed? Will that shake our plans?” 
“It will shake the universe.” 
“But they’re not unique. I, myself, possess powers which—” 
“You’re an infant. You toddle where they stride.” 
“They are  not  unique!” 
“You forget, Guildsman, that we once made a kwisatz haderach. This is a 
being ?lled by the spectacle of Time. It is a form of existence which cannot 
be threatened without enclosing yourself in the identical threat. Muad’Dib 
knows we would attack his Chani. We must move faster than we have. You 
must get to the ghola, prod him as I have instructed.” 
“And if I do not?” 
“We will feel the thunderbolt.” 
Oh, worm of many teeth , 
Canst thou deny what has no cure? 
The ?esh and breath which lure thee 
To the ground of all beginnings 
Feed on monsters twisting in a door of ?re! 
Thou hast no robe in all thy attire 
To cover intoxications of divinity 
Or hide the burnings of desire! 
—Wormsong from The Dunebook 
Paul had worked up a sweat on the practice ?oor using crysknife and short 
sword against the ghola. He stood now at a window looking down into the 
temple plaza, tried to imagine the scene with Chani at the clinic. She’d been 
taken ill at midmorning, the sixth week of her pregnancy. The medics were 
the best. They’d call when they had news. 
Murky  afternoon  sandclouds  darkened  the  sky  over  the  plaza.  Fremen 
called such weather “dirty air.” 
Would the medics never call? Each second struggled past, reluctant to 
enter his universe. 
Waiting  …  waiting  …  The  Bene  Gesserit  sent  no  word  from  Wallach. 
Deliberately delaying, of course. 
Prescient  vision  had  recorded  these  moments,  but  he  shielded  his 
awareness from the oracle, preferring the role here of a Time?sh swimming 
not where he willed, but where the currents carried him. Destiny permitted 
no struggles now. 
The ghola could be heard racking weapons, examining the equipment. 
Paul sighed, put a hand to his own belt, deactivated his shield. The tingling 
passage of its ?eld ran down against his skin. 
He’d face events when Chani came, Paul told himself. Time enough then 
to accept the fact that what he’d concealed from her had prolonged her life. 
Was it evil, he wondered, to prefer Chani to an heir? By what right did he 
make her choice for her? Foolish thoughts! Who could hesitate, given the 
alternatives—slave pits, torture, agonizing sorrow … and worse. 
He heard the door open, Chani’s footsteps. 
Paul turned. 
Murder sat on Chani’s face. The wide Fremen belt which gathered the 
waist of her golden robe, the water rings worn as a necklace, one hand at her 
hip  (never  far  from  the  knife),  the  trenchant  stare  which  was  her  ?rst 
inspection  of  any  room—everything  about  her  stood  now  only  as  a 
background for violence. 
He opened his arms as she came to him, gathered her close. 
“Someone,” she rasped, speaking against his breast, “has been feeding me 
a contraceptive for a long time … before I began the new diet. There’ll be 
problems with this birth because of it.” 
“But there are remedies?” he asked. 
“Dangerous  remedies.  I  know  the  source  of  that  poison!  I’ll  have  her 
blood.” 
“My Sihaya,” he whispered, holding her close to calm a sudden trembling. 
“You’ll bear the heir we want. Isn’t that enough?” 
“My  life  burns  faster,”  she  said,  pressing  against  him.  “The  birth  now 
controls my life. The medics told me it goes at a terrible pace. I must eat and 
eat … and take more spice, as well … eat it, drink it. I’ll kill her for this—” 
Paul  kissed  her  cheek.  “No,  my  Sihaya.  You’ll  kill  no  one.”  And  he 
thought: 
 Irulan prolonged your life, beloved. For you, the time of birth is the time 
of death 
. 
He felt hidden grief drain his marrow then, empty his life into a black 
?ask. 
Chani pushed away from him. “She cannot be forgiven!” 
“Who said anything about forgiving?” 
“Then why shouldn’t I kill her?” 
It was such a ?at, Fremen question that Paul felt himself almost overcome 
by a hysterical desire to laugh. He covered it by saying: “It wouldn’t help.” 
“You’ve  seen  that?” 
Paul felt his belly tighten with vision-memory. 
“What  I’ve  seen  …  what  I’ve  seen  …”  he  muttered.  Every  aspect  of 
surrounding events ?tted a present which paralyzed him. He felt chained to a 
future which, exposed too often, had locked onto him like a greedy succubus. 
Tight dryness clogged his throat. Had he followed the witchcall of his own 
oracle, he wondered, until it’d spilled him into a merciless present? 
“Tell me what you’ve  seen ,” Chani said. 
“I can’t.” 
“Why mustn’t I kill her?” 
“Because I ask it.” 
He  watched  her  accept  this.  She  did  it  the  way  sand  accepted  water: 
absorbing  and  concealing.  Was  there  obedience  beneath  that  hot,  angry 
surface? he wondered. And he realized then that life in the royal Keep had 
left Chani unchanged. She’d merely stopped here for a time, inhabited a way 
station on a journey with her man. Nothing of the desert had been taken 
from her. 
Chani  stepped  away  from  him  then,  glanced  at  the  ghola  who  stood 
waiting near the diamond circle of the practice ?oor. 
“You’ve been crossing blades with him?” she asked. 
“And I’m better for it.” 
Her gaze went to the circle on the ?oor, back to the ghola’s metallic eyes. 
“I don’t like it,” she said. 
“He’s not intended to do me violence,” Paul said. 
“You’ve seen  that? ” 
“I’ve not  seen  it!” 
“Then how do you know?” 
“Because he’s more than ghola; he’s Duncan Idaho.” 
“The Bene Tleilax made him.” 
“They made more than they intended.” 
She shook her head. A corner of her nezhoni scarf rubbed the collar of her 
robe. “How can you change the fact that he is ghola?” 
“Hayt,” Paul said, “are you the tool of my undoing?” 
“If the substance of here and now is changed, the future is changed,” the 
ghola said. 
“That is no answer!” Chani objected. 
Paul raised his voice: “How will I die, Hayt?” 
Light glinted from the arti?cial eyes. “It is said, m’Lord, that you will die 
of money and power.” 
Chani sti?ened. “How dare he speak thus to you?” 
“The mentat is truthful,” Paul said. 
“Was Duncan Idaho a real friend?” she asked. 
“He gave his life for me.” 
“It  is  sad,”  Chani  whispered,  “that  a  ghola  cannot  be  restored  to  his 
original being.” 
“Would you convert me?” the ghola asked, directing his gaze to Chani. 
“What does he mean?” Chani asked. 
“To be converted is to be turned around,” Paul said. “But there’s no going 
back.” 
“Every man carries his own past with him,” Hayt said. 
“And every ghola?” Paul asked. 
“In a way, m’Lord.” 
“Then what of that past in your secret ?esh?” Paul asked. 
Chani  saw  how  the  question  disturbed  the  ghola.  His  movements 
quickened, hands clenched into ?sts. She glanced at Paul, wondering why he 
probed thus. Was there a way to restore this creature to the man he’d been? 
“Has a ghola ever remembered his real past?” Chani asked. 
“Many attempts have been made,” Hayt said, his gaze ?xed on the ?oor 
near his feet. “No ghola has ever been restored to his former being.” 
“But you long for this to happen,” Paul said. 
The blank surfaces of the ghola’s eyes came up to center on Paul with a 
pressing intensity. “Yes!” 
Voice soft, Paul said: “If there’s a way …” 
“This  ?esh,”  Hayt  said,  touching  left  hand  to  forehead  in  a  curious 
saluting movement, “is not the ?esh of my original birth. It is … reborn. Only 
the shape is familiar. A Face Dancer might do as well.” 
“Not as well,” Paul said. “And you’re not a Face Dancer.” 
“That is true, m’Lord.” 
“Whence comes your shape?” 
“The genetic imprint of the original cells.” 
“Somewhere,” Paul said, “there’s a plastic something which remembers 
the shape of Duncan Idaho. It’s said the ancients probed this region before 
the Butlerian Jihad. What’s the extent of this memory, Hayt? What did it 
learn from the original?” 
The ghola shrugged. 
“What if he wasn’t Idaho?” Chani asked. 
“He was.” 
“Can you be certain?” she asked. 
“He is Duncan in every aspect. I cannot imagine a force strong enough to 
hold that shape thus without any relaxation or any deviation.” 
“M’Lord!”  Hayt  objected.  “Because  we  cannot  imagine  a  thing,  that 
doesn’t exclude it from reality. There are things I must do as a ghola that I 
would not do as a man.” 
Keeping his attention on Chani, Paul said: “You see?” 
She nodded. 
Paul  turned  away,  ?ghting  deep  sadness.  He  crossed  to  the  balcony 
windows, drew the draperies. Lights came on in the sudden gloom. He pulled 
the sash of his robe tight, listened for sounds behind him. 
Nothing. 
He turned. Chani stood as though entranced, her gaze centered on the 
ghola. 
Hayt, Paul saw, had retreated to some inner chamber of his being—had 
gone back to the ghola place. 
Chani turned at the sound of Paul’s return. She still felt the thralldom of 
the instant Paul had precipitated. For a brief moment, the ghola had been an 
intense, vital human being. For that moment, he had been someone she did 
not  fear—indeed,  someone  she  liked  and  admired.  Now,  she  understood 
Paul’s purpose in this probing. He had wanted her to see the  man  in the 
ghola ?esh. 
She stared at Paul. “That man, was that Duncan Idaho?” 
“That was Duncan Idaho. He is still there.” 
“Would  he  have allowed Irulan to go on living?” Chani asked. 
The water didn’t sink too deep , Paul thought. And he said: “If I commanded 
it.” 
“I don’t understand,” she said. “Shouldn’t you be angry?” 
“I am angry.” 
“You don’t sound … angry. You sound sorrowful.” 
He closed his eyes. “Yes. That, too.” 
“You’re my man,” she said. “I know this, but suddenly I don’t understand 
you.” 
Abruptly, Paul felt that he walked down a long cavern. His ?esh moved— 
one  foot  and  then  another—but  his  thoughts  went  elsewhere.  “I  don’t 
understand myself,” he whispered. When he opened his eyes, he found that 
he had moved away from Chani. 
She spoke from somewhere behind him. “Beloved, I’ll not ask again what 
you’ve 
 seen . I only know I’m to give you the heir we want.” 
He  nodded,  then:  “I’ve  known  that  from  the  beginning.”  He  turned, 
studied her. Chani seemed very far away. 
She drew herself up, placed a hand on her abdomen. “I’m hungry. The 
medics  tell  me  I  must  eat  three  or  four  times  what  I  ate  before.  I’m 
frightened, beloved. It goes too fast.” 
Too fast , he agreed.  This fetus knows the necessity for speed . 
The audacious nature of Muad’Dib’s actions may be seen in the fact that He 
knew from the beginning whither He was bound, yet not once did He step 
aside from that path. He put it clearly when He said: “I tell you that I come 
now  to  my  time  of  testing  when  it  will  be  shown  that  I  am  the  Ultimate 
Servant.” Thus He weaves all into One, that both friend and foe may worship 
Him.  It  is  for  this  reason  and  this  reason  only  that  His  Apostles  prayed: 
“Lord, save us from the other paths which Muad’Dib covered with the Waters 
of His Life.” Those 
 “other paths”  may be imagined only with the deepest 
revulsion 
. 
—from The Yiam-el-Din (Book of Judgment) 
The messenger was a young woman—her face, name and family known to 
Chani—which was how she’d penetrated Imperial Security. 
Chani had done no more than identify her for a Security O?cer named 
Bannerjee, who then arranged the meeting with Muad’Dib. Bannerjee acted 
out of instinct and the assurance that the young woman’s father had been a 
member of the Emperor’s Death Commandos, the dreaded Fedaykin, in the 
days before the Jihad. Otherwise, he might have ignored her plea that her 
message was intended only for the ears of Muad’Dib. 
She was, of course, screened and searched before the meeting in Paul’s 
private  o?ce.  Even  so,  Bannerjee  accompanied  her,  hand  on  knife,  other 
hand on her arm. 
It  was  almost  midday  when  they  brought  her  into  the  room—an  odd 
space, mixture of desert-Fremen and Family-Aristocrat. 
 Hiereg  hangings lined 
three  walls:  delicate  tapestries  adorned  with  ?gures  out  of  Fremen 
mythology.  A  view  screen  covered  the  fourth  wall,  a  silver-gray  surface 
behind an oval desk whose top held only one object, a Fremen sandclock 
built into an 
 orrery . The orrery, a suspensor mechanism from Ix, carried both 
moons of Arrakis in the classic Worm Trine aligned with the sun. 
Paul, standing beside the desk, glanced at Bannerjee. The Security O?cer 
was one of those who’d come up through the Fremen Constabulary, winning 
his place on brains and proven loyalty despite the smuggler ancestry attested 
by his name. He was a solid ?gure, almost fat. Wisps of black hair fell down 
over the dark, wet-appearing skin of his forehead like the crest of an exotic 
bird. His eyes were blue-blue and steady in a gaze which could look upon 
happiness or atrocity without change of expression. Both Chani and Stilgar 
trusted  him.  Paul  knew  that  if  he  told  Bannerjee  to  throttle  the  girl 
immediately, Bannerjee would do it. 
“Sire, here is the messenger girl,” Bannerjee said. “M’Lady Chani said she 
sent word to you.” 
“Yes.” Paul nodded curtly. 
Oddly, the girl didn’t look at him. Her attention remained on the orrery. 
She  was  dark-skinned,  of  medium  height,  her  ?gure  concealed  beneath  a 
robe whose rich wine fabric and simple cut spoke of wealth. Her blue-black 
hair was held in a narrow band of material which matched the robe. The 
robe  concealed  her  hands.  Paul  suspected  that  the  hands  were  tightly 
clasped. It would be in character. Everything about her would be in character 
—including the robe: a last piece of ?nery saved for such a moment. 
Paul motioned Bannerjee aside. He hesitated before obeying. Now, the 
girl moved—one step forward. When she moved there was grace. Still, her 
eyes avoided him. 
Paul cleared his throat. 
Now the girl lifted her gaze, the whiteless eyes widening with just the 
right shade of awe. She had an odd little face with delicate chin, a sense of 
reserve in the way she held her small mouth. The eyes appeared abnormally 
large above slanted cheeks. There was a cheerless air about her, something 
which  said  she  seldom  smiled.  The  corners  of  her  eyes  even  held  a  faint 
yellow misting which could have been from dust irritation or the tracery of 
semuta. 
Everything was in character. 
“You asked to see me,” Paul said. 
The moment of supreme test for this girl-shape had come. Scytale had put 
on the shape, the mannerisms, the sex, the voice—everything his abilities 
could grasp and assume. But this was a female known to Muad’Dib in the 
sietch days. She’d been a child, then, but she and Muad’Dib shared common 
experiences. Certain areas of memory must be avoided delicately. It was the 
most exacting pan Scytale had ever attempted. 
“I am Otheym’s Lichna of Berk al Dib.” 
The  girl’s  voice  came  out  small,  but  ?rm,  giving  name,  father  and 
pedigree. 
Paul nodded. He saw how Chani had been fooled. The timbre of voice, 
everything reproduced with exactitude. Had it not been for his own Bene 
Gesserit training in voice and for the web of 
 dao  in which oracular vision 
enfolded him, this Face-Dancer disguise might have gulled even him. 
Training exposed certain discrepancies: the girl was older than her known 
years:  too  much  control  tuned  the  vocal  cords;  set  of  neck  and  shoulders 
missed  by  a  fraction  the  subtle  hauteur  of  Fremen  poise.  But  there  were 
niceties, too: the rich robe had been patched to betray actual status … and 
the features were beautifully exact. They spoke a certain sympathy of this 
Face Dancer for the role being played. 
“Rest  in  my  home,  daughter  of  Otheym,”  Paul  said  in  formal  Fremen 
greeting. “You are welcome as water after a dry crossing.” 
The  faintest  of  relaxations  exposed  the  con?dence  this  apparent 
acceptance had conveyed. 
“I bring a message,” she said. 
“A man’s messenger is as himself,” Paul said. 
Scytale breathed softly. It went well, but now came the crucial task: the 
Atreides must be guided onto that special path. He must lose his Fremen 
concubine in circumstances where no other shared the blame. The failure 
must  belong  only  to  the 
  omnipotent   Muad’Dib.  He  had  to  be  led  into  an 
ultimate realization of his failure and thence to acceptance of the Tleilaxu 
alternative. 
“I  am  the  smoke  which  banishes  sleep  in  the  night,”  Scytale  said, 
employing a Fedaykin code phrase:  I bear bad tidings . 
Paul fought to maintain calmness. He felt naked, his soul abandoned in a 
groping-time  concealed  from  every  vision.  Powerful  oracles  hid  this  Face 
Dancer. Only the edges of these moments were known to Paul. He knew only 
what  he  could 
  not   do.  He  could  not  slay  this  Face  Dancer.  That  would 
precipitate the future which must be avoided at all cost. Somehow, a way 
must be found to reach into the darkness and change the terrifying pattern. 
“Give me your message,” Paul said. 
Bannerjee moved to place himself where he could watch the girl’s face. 
She seemed to notice him for the ?rst time and her gaze went to the knife 
handle beneath the Security O?cer’s hand. 
“The  innocent  do  not  believe  in  evil,”  she  said,  looking  squarely  at 
Bannerjee. 
Ahhh, well done , Paul thought. It was what the real Lichna would’ve said. 
He felt a momentary pang for the real daughter of Otheym—dead now, a 
corpse  in  the  sand.  There  was  no  time  for  such  emotions,  though.  He 
scowled. 
Bannerjee kept his attention on the girl. 
“I was told to deliver my message in secret,” she said. 
“Why?” Bannerjee demanded, voice harsh, probing. 
“Because it is my father’s wish.” 
“This is my friend,” Paul said. “Am I not a Fremen? Then my friend may 
hear anything I hear.” 
Scytale composed the girl-shape. Was this a true Fremen custom … or 
was it a test? 
“The  Emperor  may  make  his  own  rules,”  Scytale  said.  “This  is  the 
message: My father wishes you to come to him, bringing Chani.” 
“Why must I bring Chani?” 
“She is your woman and a Sayyadina. This is a Water matter, by the rules 
of  our  tribes.  She  must  attest  it  that  my  father  speaks  according  to  the 
Fremen Way.” 
There truly are Fremen in the conspiracy , Paul thought. This moment ?tted 
the  shape  of  things  to  come  for  sure.  And  he  had  no  alternative  but  to 
commit himself to this course. 
“Of what will your father speak?” Paul asked. 
“He will speak of a plot against you—a plot among the Fremen.” 
“Why doesn’t he bring that message in person?” Bannerjee demanded. 
She kept her gaze on Paul. “My father cannot come here. The plotters 
suspect him. He’d not survive the journey.” 
“Could he not divulge the plot to you?” Bannerjee asked. “How came he 
to risk his daughter on such a mission?” 
“The  details  are  locked  in  a  distrans  carrier  that  only  Muad’Dib  may 
open,” she said. “This much I know.” 
“Why not send the distrans, then?” Paul asked. 
“It is a human distrans,” she said. 
“I’ll go, then,” Paul said. “But I’ll go alone.” 
“Chani must come with you!” 
“Chani is with child.” 
“When has a Fremen woman refused to …” 
“My enemies fed her a subtle poison,” Paul said. “It will be a di?cult 
birth. Her health will not permit her to accompany me now.” 
Before  Scytale  could  still  them,  strange  emotions  passed  over  the  girl- 
features:  frustration,  anger.  Scytale  was  reminded  that  every  victim  must 
have a way of escape—even such a one as Muad’Dib. The conspiracy had not 
failed, though. This Atreides remained in the net. He was a creature who had 
developed ?rmly into one pattern. He’d destroy himself before changing into 
the opposite of that pattern. That had been the way with the Tleilaxu Kwisatz 
Haderach. It’d be the way with this one. And then … the ghola. 
“Let me ask Chani to decide this,” she said. 
“I have decided it,” Paul said. “You will accompany me in Chani’s stead.” 
“It requires a Sayyadina of the Rite!” 
“Are you not Chani’s friend?” 
Boxed!  Scytale thought.  Does he suspect? No. He’s being Fremen-cautious. 
And the contraceptive is a fact. Well—there are other ways 
. 
“My father told me I was not to return,” Scytale said, “that I was to seek 
asylum with you. He said you’d not risk me.” 
Paul  nodded.  It  was  beautifully  in  character.  He  couldn’t  deny  this 
asylum. She’d plead Fremen obedience to a father’s command. 
“I’ll take Stilgar’s wife, Harah,” Paul said. “You’ll tell us the way to your 
father.” 
“How do you know you can trust Stilgar’s wife?” 
“I know it.” 
“But I don’t.” 
Paul pursed his lips, then: “Does your mother live?” 
“My true mother has gone to Shai-hulud. My second mother still lives and 
cares for my father. Why?” 
“She’s of Sietch Tabr?” 
“Yes.” 
“I  remember  her,”  Paul  said.  “She  will  serve  in  Chani’s  place.”  He 
motioned to Bannerjee. “Have attendants take Otheym’s Lichna to suitable 
quarters.” 
Bannerjee nodded.  Attendants . The key word meant that this messenger 
must be put under special guard. He took her arm. She resisted. 
“How will you go to my father?” she pleaded. 
“You’ll describe the way to Bannerjee,” Paul said. “He is my friend.” 
“No! My father has commanded it! I cannot!” 
“Bannerjee?” Paul said. 
Bannerjee paused. Paul saw the man searching that encyclopedic memory 
which had helped bring him to his position of trust. “I know a guide who can 
take you to Otheym,” Bannerjee said. 
“Then I’ll go alone,” Paul said. 
“Sire, if you …” 
“Otheym wants it this way,” Paul said, barely concealing the irony which 
consumed him. 
“Sire, it’s too dangerous,” Bannerjee protested. 
“Even an Emperor must accept some risks,” Paul said. “The decision is 
made. Do as I’ve commanded.” 
Reluctantly, Bannerjee led the Face Dancer from the room. 
Paul  turned  toward  the  blank  screen  behind  his  desk.  He  felt  that  he 
waited for the arrival of a rock on its blind journey from some height. 
Should he tell Bannerjee about the messenger’s true nature? he wondered. 
No! Such an incident hadn’t been written on the screen of his vision. Any 
deviation here carried precipitate violence. A moment of fulcrum had to be 
found, a place where he could will himself out of the vision. 
If such a moment existed… 
No  matter  how  exotic  human  civilization  becomes,  no  matter  the 
developments of life and society nor the complexity of the machine/human 
interface, there always come interludes of lonely power when the course of 
humankind, the very future of humankind, depends upon the relatively simple 
actions of single individuals 
. 
—from The Tleilaxu Godbuk 
As  he  crossed  over  on  the  high  footbridge  from  his  Keep  to  the  Qizarate 
O?ce Building, Paul added a limp to his walk. It was almost sunset and he 
walked through long shadows that helped conceal him, but sharp eyes still 
might detect something in his carriage that identi?ed him. He wore a shield, 
but it was not activated, his aides having decided that the shimmer of it 
might arouse suspicions. 
Paul glanced left. Strings of sandclouds lay across the sunset like slatted 
shutters. The air was hiereg dry through his stillsuit ?lters. 
He wasn’t really alone out here, but the web of Security hadn’t been this 
loose around him since he’d ceased walking the streets alone in the night. 
Ornithopters with night scanners drifted far overhead in seemingly random 
pattern, all of them tied to his movements through a transmitter concealed in 
his clothing. Picked men walked the streets below. Others had fanned out 
through the city after seeing the Emperor in his disguise—Fremen costume 
down  to  the  stillsuit  and 
  temag   desert  boots,  the  darkened  features.  His 
cheeks had been distorted with plastene inserts. A catchtube ran down along 
his left jaw. 
As he reached the opposite end of the bridge, Paul glanced back, noted a 
movement beside the stone lattice that concealed a balcony of his private 
quarters. Chani, no doubt. “Hunting for sand in the desert,” she’d called this 
venture. 
How little she understood the bitter choice. Selecting among agonies, he 
thought, made even lesser agonies near unbearable. 
For a blurred, emotionally painful moment, he relived their parting. At 
the last instant, Chani had experienced a tau-glimpse of his feelings, but she 
had misinterpreted. She had thought his emotions were those experienced in 
the parting of loved ones when one entered the dangerous unknown. 
Would that I did not know , he thought. 
He  had  crossed  the  bridge  now  and  entered  the  upper  passageway 
through the o?ce building. There were ?xed glowglobes here and people 
hurrying  on  business.  The  Qizarate  never  slept.  Paul  found  his  attention 
caught by the signs above doorways, as though he were seeing them for the 
?rst time: 
 Speed Merchants. Wind Stills and Retorts. Prophetic Prospects. Tests of 
Faith. Religious Supply. Weaponry … Propagation of the Faith … 
A  more  honest  label  would’ve  been   Propagation  of  the  Bureaucracy ,  he 
thought. 
A type of religious civil servant had sprung up all through his universe. 
This new man of the Qizarate was more often a convert. He seldom displaced 
a  Fremen  in  the  key  posts,  but  he  was  ?lling  all  the  interstices.  He  used 
melange as much to show he could a?ord it as for the geriatric bene?ts. He 
stood  apart  from  his  rulers—Emperor,  Guild,  Bene  Gesserit,  Landsraad, 
Family or Qizarate. His gods were Routine and Records. He was served by 
mentats and prodigious ?ling systems. Expediency was the ?rst word in his 
catechism,  although  he  gave  proper  lip-service  to  the  precepts  of  the 
Butlerians. Machines could not be fashioned in the image of a man’s mind, he 
said, but he betrayed by every action that he preferred machines to men, 
statistics to individuals, the faraway general view to the intimate personal 
touch requiring imagination and initiative. 
As Paul emerged onto the ramp at the far side of the building, he heard 
the bells calling the Evening Rite at Alia’s Fane. 
There was an odd feeling of permanence about the bells. 
The  temple  across  the  thronged  square  was  new,  its  rituals  of  recent 
devising, but there was something about this setting in a desert sink at the 
edge  of  Arrakeen—something  in  the  way  wind-driven  sand  had  begun  to 
weather stones and plastene, something in the haphazard way buildings had 
gone up around the Fane. Everything conspired to produce the impression 
that this was a very old place full of traditions and mystery. 
He was down into the press of people now—committed. The only guide 
his Security force could ?nd had insisted it be done this way. Security hadn’t 
liked Paul’s ready agreement. Stilgar had liked it even less. And Chani had 
objected most of all. 
The  crowd  around  him,  even  while  its  members  brushed  against  him, 
glanced  his  way  unseeing  and  passed  on,  gave  him  a  curious  freedom  of 
movement. It was the way they’d been conditioned to treat a Fremen, he 
knew.  He  carried  himself  like  a  man  of  the  inner  desert.  Such  men  were 
quick to anger. 
As he moved into the quickening ?ow to the temple steps, the crush of 
people  became  even  greater.  Those  all  around  could  not  help  but  press 
against him now, but he found himself the target for ritual apologies: “Your 
pardon, noble sir. I cannot prevent this discourtesy.” “Pardon, sir; this crush 
of people is the worst I’ve ever seen.” “I abase myself, holy citizen. A lout 
shoved me.” 
Paul ignored the words after the ?rst few. There was no feeling in them 
except a kind of ritual fear. He found himself, instead, thinking that he had 
come a long way from his boyhood days in Caladan Castle. Where had he put 
his foot on the path that led to this journey across a crowded square on a 
planet so far from Caladan? Had he really put his foot on a path? He could 
not say he had acted at any point in his life for one speci?c reason. The 
motives  and  impinging  forces  had  been  complex—more  complex  possibly 
than any other set of goads in human history. He had the heady feeling here 
that he might still avoid the fate he could see so clearly along this path. But 
the crowd pushed him forward and he experienced the dizzy sense that he 
had lost his way, lost personal direction over his life. 
The crowd ?owed with him up the steps now into the temple portico. 
Voices grew hushed. The smell of fear grew stronger—acrid, sweaty. 
Acolytes  had  already  begun  the  service  within  the  temple.  Their  plain 
chant dominated the other sounds—whispers, rustle of garments, shu?ing 
feet, coughs—telling the story of the Far Places visited by the Priestess in her 
holy trance. 
“She rides the sandworm of space! 
She guides through all storms 
Into the land of gentle winds. 
Though we sleep by the snake’s den, 
She guards our dreaming souls. 
Shunning the desert heat, 
She hides us in a cool hollow. 
The gleaming of her white teeth 
Guides us in the night. 
By the braids of her hair 
We are lifted up to heaven! 
Sweet fragrance, ?ower-scented, 
Surrounds us in her presence.” 
Balak!  Paul thought, thinking in Fremen.  Look out! She can be ?lled with 
angry passion, too 
. 
The  temple  portico  was  lined  with  tall,  slender  glowtubes  simulating 
candle  ?ame.  They  ?ickered.  The  ?ickering  stirred  ancestral  memories  in 
Paul even while he knew that was the intent. This setting was an atavism, 
subtly contrived, e?ective. He hated his own hand in it. 
The crowd ?owed with him through tall metal doors into the gigantic 
nave,  a  gloomy  place  with  the  ?ickering  lights  far  away  overhead,  a 
brilliantly illuminated altar at the far end. Behind the altar, a deceptively 
simple a?air of black wood encrusted with sand patterns from the Fremen 
mythology,  hidden  lights  played  on  the  ?eld  of  a  pru-door  to  create  a 
rainbow  borealis.  The  seven  rows  of  chanting  acolytes  ranked  below  that 
spectral curtain took on an eerie quality: black robes, white faces, mouths 
moving in unison. 
Paul  studied  the  pilgrims  around  him,  suddenly  envious  of  their 
intentness, their air of listening to truths he could not hear. It seemed to him 
that  they  gained  something  here  which  was  denied  to  him,  something 
mysteriously healing. 
He tried to inch his way closer to the altar, was stopped by a hand on his 
arm.  Paul  whipped  his  gaze  around,  met  the  probing  stare  of  an  ancient 
Fremen—blue-blue eyes beneath overhanging brows, recognition in them. A 
name ?ashed into Paul’s mind: Rasir, a companion from the sietch days. 
In the press of the crowd, Paul knew he was completely vulnerable if 
Rasir planned violence. 
The  old  man  pressed  close,  one  hand  beneath  a  sand-grimed  robe— 
grasping the hilt of a crysknife, no doubt. Paul set himself as best he could to 
resist attack. The old man moved his head toward Paul’s ear, whispered: “We 
will go with the others.” 
It was the signal to identify his guide. Paul nodded. 
Rasir drew back, faced the altar. 
“She comes from the east,” the acolytes chanted. “The sun stands at her 
back.  All  things  are  exposed.  In  the  full  glare  of  light—her  eyes  miss  no 
thing, neither light nor dark.” 
A  wailing  rebaba  jarred  across  the  voices,  stilled  them,  receded  into 
silence.  With  an  electric  abruptness,  the  crowd  surged  forward  several 
meters. They were packed into a tight mass of ?esh now, the air heavy with 
their breathing and the scent of spice. 
“Shai-hulud writes on clean sand!” the acolytes shouted. 
Paul  felt  his  own  breath  catch  in  unison  with  those  around  him.  A 
feminine  chorus  began  singing  faintly  from  the  shadows  behind  the 
shimmering pru-door: “Alia … Alia … Alia …” It grew louder and louder, fell 
to a sudden silence. 
Again—voices beginning vesper-soft: 
“She stills all storms— 
Her eyes kill our enemies, 
And torment the unbelievers. 
From the spires of Tuono 
Where dawnlight strikes 
And clear water runs, 
You see her shadow. 
In the shining summer heat 
She serves us bread and milk— 
Cool, fragrant with spices, 
Her eyes melt our enemies, 
Torment our oppressors 
And pierce all mysteries. 
She is Alia … Alia … Alia … Alia ….” 
Slowly, the voices trailed o?. 
Paul felt sickened.  What are we doing?  he asked himself. Alia was a child 
witch, but she was growing older. And he thought: 
 Growing older is to grow 
more wicked 
. 
The  collective  mental  atmosphere  of  the  temple  ate  at  his  psyche.  He 
could sense that element of himself which was one with those all around 
him, but the di?erences formed a deadly contradiction. He stood immersed, 
isolated in a personal sin which he could never expiate. The immensity of the 
universe outside the temple ?ooded his awareness. How could one man, one 
ritual, hope to knit such immensity into a garment ?tted to all men? 
Paul shuddered. 
The universe opposed him at every step. It eluded his grasp, conceived 
countless disguises to delude him. That universe would never agree with any 
shape he gave it. 
A profound hush spread through the temple. 
Alia emerged from the darkness behind the shimmering rainbows. She 
wore a yellow robe trimmed in Atreides green—yellow for sunlight, green for 
the  death  which  produced  life.  Paul  experienced  the  sudden  surprising 
thought that Alia had emerged here just for him, for him alone. He stared 
across the mob in the temple at his sister. She 
 was  his sister. He knew her 
ritual and its roots, but he had never before stood out here with the pilgrims, 
watched her through their eyes. Here, performing the mystery of this place, 
he saw that she partook of the universe which opposed him. 
Acolytes brought her a golden chalice. 
Alia raised the chalice. 
With  part  of  his  awareness,  Paul  knew  that  the  chalice  contained  the 
unaltered melange, the subtle poison, her sacrament of the oracle. 
Her gaze on the chalice, Alia spoke. Her voice caressed the ears, ?ower 
sound, ?owing and musical: 
“In the beginning, we were empty,” she said. 
“Ignorant of all things,” the chorus sang. 
“We did not know the Power that abides in every place,” Alia said. 
“And in every Time,” the chorus sang. 
“Here is the Power,” Alia said, raising the chalice slightly. 
“It brings us joy,” sang the chorus. 
And it brings us distress , Paul thought. 
“It awakens the soul,” Alia said. 
“It dispels all doubts,” the chorus sang. 
“In worlds, we perish,” Alia said. 
“In the Power, we survive,” sang the chorus. 
Alia put the chalice to her lips, drank. 
To  his  astonishment,  Paul  found  he  was  holding  his  breath  like  the 
meanest  pilgrim  of  this  mob.  Despite  every  shred  of  personal  knowledge 
about the experience Alia was undergoing, he had been caught in the tao- 
web. He felt himself remembering how that ?ery poison coursed into the 
body. Memory unfolded the time-stopping when awareness became a mote 
which changed the poison. He reexperienced the awakening into timelessness 
where all things were possible. He 
 knew  Alia’s present experience, yet he saw 
now that he did not know it. Mystery blinded the eyes. 
Alia trembled, sank to her knees. 
Paul exhaled with the enraptured pilgrims. He nodded. Part of the veil 
began to lift from him. Absorbed in the bliss of a vision, he had forgotten 
that  each  vision  belonged  to  all  those  who  were  still  on-the-way,  still  to 
become. In the vision, one passed through a darkness, unable to distinguish 
reality from insubstantial accident. One hungered for absolutes which could 
never be. 
Hungering, one lost the present. 
Alia swayed with the rapture of spice change. 
Paul felt that some transcendental presence spoke to him, saying: “Look! 
See there! See what you’ve ignored?” In that instant, he thought he looked 
through other eyes, that he saw-an imagery and rhythm in this place which 
no artist or poet could reproduce. It was vital and beautiful, a glaring light 
that exposed all power-gluttony … even his own. 
Alia spoke. Her ampli?ed voice boomed across the nave. 
“Luminous night,” she cried. 
A moan swept like a wave through the crush of pilgrims. 
“Nothing  hides  in  such  a  night!”  Alia  said.  “What  rare  light  is  this 
darkness?  You  cannot  ?x  your  gaze  upon  it!  Senses  cannot  record  it.  No 
words describe it.” Her voice lowered. “The abyss remains. It is pregnant 
with all the things yet to be. Ahhhhh, what gentle violence!” 
Paul felt that he waited for some private signal from his sister. It could be 
any  action  or  word,  something  of  wizardry  and  mystical  processes,  an 
outward streaming that would ?t him like an arrow into a cosmic bow. This 
instant lay like quivering mercury in his awareness. 
“There will be sadness,” Alia intoned. “I remind you that all things are 
but  a  beginning,  forever  beginning.  Worlds  wait  to  be  conquered.  Some 
within the sound of my voice will attain exalted destinies. You will sneer at 
the past, forgetting what I tell you now: within all di?erences there is unity.” 
Paul suppressed a cry of disappointment as Alia lowered her head. She 
had not said the thing he waited to hear. His body felt like a dry shell, a husk 
abandoned by some desert insect. 
Others must feel something similar, he thought. He sensed the restlessness 
about him. Abruptly, a woman in the mob, someone far down in the nave to 
Paul’s left, cried out, a wordless noise of anguish. 
Alia lifted her head and Paul had the giddy sensation that the distance 
between them collapsed, that he stared directly into her glazed eyes only 
inches away from her. 
“Who summons me?” Alia asked. 
“I do,” the woman cried. “I do, Alia. Oh, Alia, help me. They say my son 
was killed on Muritan. Is he gone? Will I never see my son again … never?” 
“You try to walk backward in the sand,” Alia intoned. “Nothing is lost. 
Everything returns later, but you may not recognize the changed form that 
returns.” 
“Alia, I don’t understand!” the woman wailed. 
“You live in the air but you do not see it,” Alia said, sharpness in her 
voice. “Are you a lizard? Your voice has the Fremen accent. Does a Fremen 
try to bring back the dead? What do we need from our dead except their 
water?” 
Down in the center of the nave, a man in a rich red cloak lifted both 
hands, the sleeves falling to expose white-clad arms. “Alia,” he shouted, “I 
have had a business proposal. Should I accept?” 
“You come here like a beggar,” Alia said. “You look for the golden bowl 
but you will ?nd only a dagger.” 
“I have been asked to kill a man!” a voice shouted from o? to the right—a 
deep voice with sietch tones. “Should I accept? Accepting, would I succeed?” 
“Beginning and end are a single thing,” Alia snapped. “Have I not told 
you this before? You didn’t come here to ask that question. What is it you 
cannot believe that you must come here and cry out against it?” 
“She’s in a ?erce mood tonight,” a woman near Paul muttered. “Have you 
ever seen her this angry?” 
She knows I’m out here , Paul thought.  Did she see something in the vision that 
angered her? Is she raging at me? 
“Alia,” a man directly in front of Paul called. “Tell these businessmen and 
faint-hearts how long your brother will rule!” 
“I permit you to look around that corner by yourself,” Alia snarled. “You 
carry your prejudice in your mouth! It is because my brother rides the worm 
of chaos that you have roof and water!” 
With  a  ?erce  gesture,  clutching  her  robe,  Alia  whirled  away,  strode 
through the shimmering ribbons of light, was lost in the darkness behind. 
Immediately, the acolytes took up the closing chant, but their rhythm was 
o?. Obviously, they’d been caught by the unexpected ending of the rite. An 
incoherent mumbling arose on all sides of the crowd. Paul felt the stirring 
around him—restless, dissatis?ed. 
“It was that fool with his stupid question about business,” a woman near 
Paul muttered. “The hypocrite!” 
What had Alia seen? What track through the future? 
Something  had  happened  here  tonight,  souring  the  rite  of  the  oracle. 
Usually, the crowd clamored for Alia to answer their pitiful questions. They 
came as beggars to the oracle, yes. He had heard them thus many times as 
he’d  watched,  hidden  in  the  darkness  behind  the  altar.  What  had  been 
di?erent about this night? 
The old Fremen tugged Paul’s sleeve, nodded toward the exit. The crowd 
already was beginning to push in that direction. Paul allowed himself to be 
pressed along with them, the guide’s hand upon his sleeve. There was the 
feeling  in  him  then  that  his  body  had  become  the  manifestation  of  some 
power he could no longer control. He had become a non-being, a stillness 
which moved itself. At the core of the non-being, there he existed, allowing 
himself to be led through the streets of his city, following a track so familiar 
to his visions that it froze his heart with grief. 
I should know what Alia saw , he thought.  I have seen it enough times myself. 
And she didn’t cry out against it … she saw the alternatives, too 
. 
Production growth and income growth must not get out of step in my Empire. 
That is the substance of my command. There are to be no balance-of-payment 
di?culties between the di?erent spheres of in?uence. And the reason for this is 
simply because I command it. I want to emphasize my authority in this area. I 
am the supreme energy-eater of this domain, and will remain so, alive or dead. 
My Government is the economy 
. 
—Order in Council The Emperor Paul Muad’Dib 
“I will leave you here,” the old man said, taking his hand from Paul’s sleeve. 
“It  is  on  the  right,  second  door  from  the  far  end.  Go  with  Shai-hulud, 
Muad’Dib … and remember when you were Usul.” 
Paul’s guide slipped away into the darkness. 
There would be Security men somewhere out there waiting to grab the 
guide and take the man to a place of questioning, Paul knew. But Paul found 
himself hoping the old Fremen would escape. 
There were stars overhead and the distant light of First Moon somewhere 
beyond the Shield Wall. But this place was not the open desert where a man 
could sight on a star to guide his course. The old man had brought him into 
one of the new suburbs; this much Paul recognized. 
This street now was thick with sand blown in from encroaching dunes. A 
dim light glowed from a single public suspensor globe far down the street. It 
gave enough illumination to show that this was a dead-end street. 
The air around him was thick with the smell of a reclamation still. The 
thing  must  be  poorly  capped  for  its  fetid  odors  to  escape,  loosing  a 
dangerously wasteful amount of moisture into the night air. How careless his 
people had grown, Paul thought. They were millionaires of water—forgetful 
of the days when a man on Arrakis could have been killed for just an eighth 
share of the water in his body. 
Why am I hesitating?  Paul wondered.  It is the second door from the far end. I 
knew that without being told. But this thing must be played out with precision. So 
… I hesitate 
. 
The noise of an argument arose suddenly from the corner house on Paul’s 
left. A woman there berated someone: the new wing of their house leaked 
dust, she complained. Did he think water fell from heaven? If dust came in, 
moisture got out. 
Some remember , Paul thought. 
He moved down the street and the quarrel faded away behind. 
Water from heaven!  he thought. 
Some  Fremen  had  seen  that  wonder  on  other  worlds.  He  had  seen  it 
himself, had ordered it for Arrakis, but the memory of it felt like something 
that  had  occurred  to  another  person.  Rain,  it  was  called.  Abruptly,  he 
recalled a rainstorm on his birthworld—clouds thick and gray in the sky of 
Caladan, an electric storm presence, moist air, the big wet drops drumming 
on skylights. It ran in rivulets o? the eaves. Storm drains took the water 
away to a river which ran muddy and turgid past the Family orchards … 
trees there with their barren branches glistening wetly. 
Paul’s foot caught in a low drift of sand across the street. For an instant, 
he felt mud clinging to the shoes of his childhood. Then he was back in the 
sand,  in  the  dust-clotted,  wind-mu?ed  darkness  with  the  Future  hanging 
over  him,  taunting.  He  could  feel  the  aridity  of  life  around  him  like  an 
accusation.  You did this!  They’d become a civilization of dry-eyed watchers 
and tale-tellers, people who solved all problems with power … and more 
power … and still more power—hating every erg of it. 
Rough  stones  came  underfoot.  His  vision  remembered  them.  The  dark 
rectangle  of  a  doorway  appeared  on  his  right—black  in  black:  Otheym’s 
house, Fate’s house, a place di?erent from the ones around it only in the role 
Time had chosen for it. It was a strange place to be marked down in history. 
The door opened to his knock. The gap revealed the dull green light of an 
atrium. A dwarf peered out, ancient face on a child’s body, an apparition 
prescience had never seen. 
“You’ve come then,” the apparition said. The dwarf stepped aside, no awe 
in his manner, merely the gloating of a slow smile. “Come in! Come in!” 
Paul hesitated. There’d been no dwarf in the vision, but all else remained 
identical. Visions could contain such disparities and still hold true to their 
original  plunge  into  in?nity.  But  the  di?erence  dared  him  to  hope.  He 
glanced  back  up  the  street  at  the  creamy  pearl  glistening  of  his  moon 
swimming out of jagged shadows. The moon haunted him. How did it fall? 
“Come in,” the dwarf insisted. 
Paul  entered,  heard  the  door  thud  into  its  moisture  seals  behind.  The 
dwarf passed him, led the way, enormous feet slapping the ?oor, opened the 
delicate lattice gate into the roofed central courtyard, gestured. “They await, 
Sire.” 
Sire , Paul thought.  He knows me, then . 
Before Paul could explore this discovery, the dwarf slipped away down a 
side passage. Hope was a dervish wind whirling, dancing in Paul. He headed 
across the courtyard. It was a dark and gloomy place, the smell of sickness 
and defeat in it. He felt daunted by the atmosphere. Was it defeat to choose a 
lesser evil? he wondered. How far down this track had he come? 
Light poured from a narrow doorway in the far wall. He put down the 
feeling of watchers and evil smells, entered the doorway into a small room. It 
was a barren place by Fremen standards with heireg hangings on only two 
walls. Opposite the door, a man sat on carmine cushions beneath the best 
hanging. A feminine ?gure hovered in shadows behind another doorway in a 
barren wall to the left. 
Paul  felt  vision-trapped.  This  was  the  way  it’d  gone.  Where  was  the 
dwarf? Where was the di?erence? 
His senses absorbed the room in a single gestalten sweep. The place had 
received painstaking care despite its poor furnishings. Hooks and rods across 
the barren walls showed where hangings had been removed. Pilgrims paid 
enormous prices for authentic Fremen artifacts, Paul reminded himself. Rich 
pilgrims counted desert tapestries as treasures, true marks of a hajj. 
Paul felt that the barren walls accused him with their fresh gypsum wash. 
The threadbare condition of the two remaining hangings ampli?ed the sense 
of guilt. 
A narrow shelf occupied the wall on his right. It held a row of portraits— 
mostly  bearded  Fremen,  some  in  stillsuits  with  their  catchtubes  dangling, 
some in Imperial uniforms posed against exotic o?world backgrounds. The 
most common scene was a seascape. 
The Fremen on the cushions cleared his throat, forcing Paul to look at 
him. It was Otheym precisely as the vision had revealed him: neck grown 
scrawny, a bird thing which appeared too weak to support the large head. 
The  face  was  a  lopsided  ruin—networks  of  crisscrossed  scars  on  the  left 
cheek  below  a  drooping,  wet  eye,  but  clear  skin  on  the  other  side  and  a 
straight, blue-in-blue Fremen gaze. A long kedge of a nose bisected the face. 
Otheym’s  cushion  sat  in  the  center  of  a  threadbare  rug,  brown  with 
maroon and gold threads. The cushion fabric betrayed splotches of wear and 
patching,  but  every  bit  of  metal  around  the  seated  ?gure  shone  from 
polishing—the portrait frames, shelf lip and brackets, the pedestal of a low 
table on the right. 
Paul nodded to the clear half of Otheym’s face, said: “Good luck to you 
and your dwelling place.” It was the greeting of an old friend and sietch 
mate. 
“So I see you once more, Usul.” 
The voice speaking his tribal name whined with an old man’s quavering. 
The  dull  drooping  eye  on  the  ruined  side  of  the  face  moved  above  the 
parchment skin and scars. Gray bristles stubbled that side and the jawline 
there hung with scabrous peelings. Otheym’s mouth twisted as he spoke, the 
gap exposing silvery metal teeth. 
“Muad’Dib always answers the call of a Fedaykin,” Paul said. 
The woman in the doorway shadows moved, said: “So Stilgar boasts.” 
She came forward into the light, an older version of the Lichna which the 
Face Dancer had copied. Paul recalled then that Otheym had married sisters. 
Her hair was gray, nose grown witch-sharp. Weavers’ calluses ran along her 
fore?ngers and thumbs. A Fremen woman would’ve displayed such marks 
proudly in the sietch days, but she saw his attention on her hands, hid them 
under a fold of her pale blue robe. 
Paul remembered her name then—Dhuri. The shock was he remembered 
her as a child, not as she’d been in his vision of these moments. It was the 
whine that edged her voice, Paul told himself. She’d whined even as a child. 
“You  see  me  here,”  Paul  said.  “Would  I  be  here  if  Stilgar  hadn’t 
approved?” He turned toward Otheym. “I carry your water burden, Otheym. 
Command me.” 
This was the straight Fremen talk of sietch brothers. 
Otheym produced a shaky nod, almost too much for that thin neck. He 
lifted a liver-marked left hand, pointed to the ruin of his face. “I caught the 
splitting  disease  on  Tarahell,  Usul,”  he  wheezed.  “Right  after  the  victory 
when we’d all …” A ?t of coughing stopped his voice. 
“The tribe will collect his water soon,” Dhuri said. She crossed to Otheym, 
propped  pillows  behind  him,  held  his  shoulder  to  steady  him  until  the 
coughing passed. She wasn’t really very old, Paul saw, but a look of lost 
hopes ringed her mouth, bitterness lay in her eyes. 
“I’ll summon doctors,” Paul said. 
Dhuri turned, hand on hip. “We’ve had medical men, as good as any you 
could summon.” She sent an involuntary glance to the barren wall on her 
left. 
And the medical men were costly , Paul thought. 
He felt edgy, constrained by the vision but aware that minor di?erences 
had crept in. How could he exploit the di?erences? Time came out of its 
skein  with  subtle  changes,  but  the  background  fabric  held  oppressive 
sameness. He knew with terrifying certainty that if he tried to break out of 
the  enclosing  pattern  here,  it’d  become  a  thing  of  terrible  violence.  The 
power in this deceptively gentle ?ow of Time oppressed him. 
“Say what you want of me,” he growled. 
“Couldn’t  it  be  that  Otheym  needed  a  friend  to  stand  by  him  in  this 
time?” Dhuri asked. “Does a Fedaykin have to consign his ?esh to strangers?” 
We shared Sietch Tabr , Paul reminded himself.  She has the right to berate me 
for apparent callousness 
. 
“What I can do I will do,” Paul said. 
Another ?t of coughing shook Otheym. When it had passed, he gasped: 
“There’s treachery, Usul. Fremen plot against you.” His mouth worked then 
without sound. Spittle escaped his lips. Dhuri wiped his mouth with a corner 
of her robe, and Paul saw how her face betrayed anger at such waste of 
moisture. 
Frustrated rage threatened to overwhelm Paul then.  That Otheym should be 
spent  thus!  A  Fedaykin  deserved  better 
.  But  no  choice  remained—not  for  a 
Death Commando or his Emperor. They walked Occam’s razor in this room. 
The slightest misstep multiplied horrors—not just for themselves, but for all 
humankind, even for those who would destroy them. 
Paul squeezed calmness into his mind, looked at Dhuri. The expression of 
terrible longing with which she gazed at Otheym strengthened Paul. 
 Chani 
must never look at me that way 
, he told himself. 
“Lichna spoke of a message,” Paul said. 
“My dwarf,” Otheym wheezed. “I bought him on … on … on a world … I 
forget. He’s a human distrans, a toy discarded by the Tleilaxu. He’s recorded 
all the names … the traitors …” 
Otheym fell silent, trembling. 
“You speak of Lichna,” Dhuri said. “When you arrived, we knew she’d 
reached  you  safely.  If  you’re  thinking  of  this  new  burden  Otheym  places 
upon you, Lichna is the sum of that burden. An even exchange, Usul: take the 
dwarf and go.” 
Paul suppressed a shudder, closed his eyes.  Lichna!  The real daughter had 
perished in the desert, a semuta-wracked body abandoned to the sand and 
the wind. 
Opening his eyes, Paul said: “You could’ve come to me at any time for …” 
“Otheym stayed away that he might be numbered among those who hate 
you, Usul,” Dhuri said. “The house to the south of us at the end of the street, 
that is a gathering place for your foes. It’s why we took this hovel.” 
“Then summon the dwarf and we’ll leave,” Paul said. 
“You’ve not listened well,” Dhuri said. 
“You must take the dwarf to a safe place,” Otheym said, an odd strength 
in his voice. “He carries the only record of the traitors. No one suspects his 
talent. They think I keep him for amusement.” 
“We cannot leave,” Dhuri said. “Only you and the dwarf. It’s known … 
how poor we are. We’ve said we’re selling the dwarf. They’ll take you for the 
buyer. It’s your only chance.” 
Paul consulted his memory of the vision: in it, he’d left here with the 
names of the traitors, but never seeing how those names were carried. The 
dwarf obviously moved under the protection of another oracle. It occurred to 
Paul then that all creatures must carry some kind of destiny stamped out by 
purposes  of  varying  strengths,  by  the  ?xation  of  training  and  disposition. 
From the moment the Jihad had chosen him, he’d felt himself hemmed in by 
the forces of a multitude. Their ?xed purposes demanded and controlled his 
course.  Any  delusions  of  Free  Will  he  harbored  now  must  be  merely  the 
prisoner rattling his cage. His curse lay in the fact that he 
 saw  the cage. He 
saw  it! 
He listened now to the emptiness of this house: only the four of them in it 
—Dhuri, Otheym, the dwarf and himself. He inhaled the fear and tension of 
his companions, sensed the watchers—his own force hovering in ’thopters far 
overhead … and those others … next door. 
I was wrong to hope , Paul thought. But thinking of hope brought him a 
twisted 
 sense  of hope, and he felt that he might yet seize his moment. 
“Summon the dwarf,” he said. 
“Bijaz!” Dhuri called. 
“You call me?” The dwarf stepped into the room from the courtyard, an 
alert expression of worry on his face. 
“You have a new master, Bijaz,” Dhuri said. She stared at Paul. “You may 
call him … Usul.” 
“Usul, that’s the base of the pillar,” Bijaz said, translating. “How can Usul 
be base when I’m the basest thing living?” 
“He always speaks thus,” Otheym apologized. 
“I don’t speak,” Bijaz said. “I operate a machine called language. It creaks 
and groans, but is mine own.” 
A Tleilaxu toy, learned and alert , Paul thought.  The Bene Tleilax never threw 
away something this valuable 
. He turned, studied the dwarf. Round melange 
eyes returned his stare. 
“What other talents have you, Bijaz?” Paul asked. 
“I know when we should leave,” Bijaz said. “It’s a talent few men have. 
There’s a time for endings—and that’s a good beginning. Let us begin to go, 
Usul.” 
Paul examined his vision memory: no dwarf, but the little man’s words 
?tted the occasion. 
“At the door, you called me Sire,” Paul said. “You know me, then?” 
“You’ve sired, Sire,” Bijaz said, grinning. “You are much more than the 
base  Usul.  You’re  the  Atreides  emperor,  Paul  Muad’Dib.  And  you  are  my 
?nger.” He held up the index ?nger of his right hand. 
“Bijaz!” Dhuri snapped. “You tempt fate.” 
“I tempt my ?nger,” Bijaz protested, voice squeaking. He pointed at Usul. 
“I  point  at  Usul.  Is  my  ?nger  not  Usul  himself?  Or  is  it  a  re?ection  of 
something more base?” He brought the ?nger close to his eyes, examined it 
with a mocking grin, ?rst one side then the other. “Ahhh, it’s merely a ?nger, 
after ah.” 
“He often rattles on thus,” Dhuri said, worry in her voice. “I think it’s why 
he was discarded by the Tleilaxu.” 
“I’ll not be patronized,” Bijaz said, “yet I have a new patron. How strange 
the  workings  of  the  ?nger.”  He  peered  at  Dhuri  and  Otheym,  eyes  oddly 
bright.  “A  weak  glue  bound  us,  Otheym.  A  few  tears  and  we  part.”  The 
dwarf’s big feet rasped on the ?oor as he whirled completely around, stopped 
facing Paul. “Ahhh, patron! I came the long way around to ?nd you.” 
Paul nodded. 
“You’ll  be  kind,  Usul?”  Bijaz  asked.  “I’m  a  person,  you  know.  Persons 
come in many shapes and sizes. This be but one of them. I’m weak of muscle, 
but strong of mouth; cheap to feed, but costly to ?ll. Empty me as you will, 
there’s still more in me than men put there.” 
“We’ve no time for your stupid riddles,” Dhuri growled. “You should be 
gone.” 
“I’m riddled with conundrums,” Bijaz said, “but not all of them stupid. To 
be gone, Usul, is to be a bygone. Yes? Let us let bygones be bygones. Dhuri 
speaks truth, and I’ve the talent for hearing that, too.” 
“You’ve  truthsense?”  Paul  asked,  determined  now  to  wait  out  the 
clockwork of his vision. Anything was better than shattering these moments 
and producing the new consequences. There remained things for Otheym to 
say lest Time be diverted into even more horrifying channels. 
“I’ve  now -sense,” Bijaz said. 
Paul noted that the dwarf had grown more nervous. Was the little man 
aware of things about to happen? Could Bijaz be his own oracle? 
“Did you inquire of Lichna?” Otheym asked suddenly, peering up at Dhuri 
with his one good eye. 
“Lichna is safe,” Dhuri said. 
Paul lowered his head, lest his expression betray the lie.  Safe!  Lichna was 
ashes in a secret grave. 
“That’s good then,” Otheym said, taking Paul’s lowered head for a nod of 
agreement. “One good thing among the evils, Usul. I don’t like the world 
we’re  making,  you  know  that?  It  was  better  when  we  were  alone  in  the 
desert with only the Harkonnens for enemy.” 
“There’s but a thin line between many an enemy and many a friend,” 
Bijaz said. “Where that line stops, there’s no beginning and no end. Let’s end 
it, my friends.” He moved to Paul’s side, jittered from one foot to the other. 
“What’s   now -sense?”  Paul  asked,  dragging  out  these  moments,  goading 
the dwarf. 
“Now!” Bijaz said, trembling. “Now! Now!” He tugged at Paul’s robe. “Let 
us go now!” 
“His mouth rattles, but there’s no harm in him,” Otheym said, a?ection in 
his voice, the one good eye staring at Bijaz. 
“Even a rattle can signal departure,” Bijaz said. “And so can tears. Let’s be 
gone while there’s time to begin.” 
“Bijaz, what do you fear?” Paul asked. 
“I fear the spirit seeking me now,” Bijaz muttered. Perspiration stood out 
on his forehead. His cheeks twitched. “I fear the one who thinks not and will 
have no body except mine—and that one gone back into itself! I fear the 
things I see and the things I do not see.” 
This dwarf does possess the power of prescience , Paul thought. Bijaz shared 
the terrifying oracle. Did he share the oracle’s fate, as well? How potent was 
the dwarf’s power? Did he have the little prescience of those who dabbled in 
the Dune Tarot? Or was it something greater? How much had he seen? 
“Best you go,” Dhuri said. “Bijaz is right.” 
“Every minute we linger,” Bijaz said, “prolongs … prolongs the present!” 
Every minute I linger defers my guilt , Paul thought. A worm’s poisonous 
breath, its teeth dripping dust, had washed over him. It had happened long 
ago, but he inhaled the memory of it now—spice and bitterness. He could 
sense his own worm waiting—“the urn of the desert.” 
“These  are  troubled  times,”  he  said,  addressing  himself  to  Otheym’s 
judgment of their world. 
“Fremen know what to do in time of trouble,” Dhuri said. 
Otheym contributed a shaky nod. 
Paul  glanced  at  Dhuri.  He’d  not  expected  gratitude,  would  have  been 
burdened by it more than he could bear, but Otheym’s bitterness and the 
passionate resentment he saw in Dhuri’s eyes shook his resolve. Was 
 anything 
worth this price? 
“Delay serves no purpose,” Dhuri said. 
“Do what you must, Usul,” Otheym wheezed. 
Paul sighed. The words of the vision had been spoken. “There’ll be an 
accounting,” he said to complete it. Turning, he strode from the room, heard 
Bijaz foot-slapping behind. 
“Bygones, bygones,” Bijaz muttered as they went. “Let bygones fall where 
they may. This has been a dirty day.” 
The convoluted wording of legalisms grew up around the necessity to hide from 
ourselves the violence we intend toward each other. Between depriving a man of 
one hour from his life and depriving him of his life there exists only a di?erence 
of  degree.  You  have  done  violence  to  him,  consumed  his  energy.  Elaborate 
euphemisms may conceal your intent to kill, but behind any use of power over 
another the ultimate assumption remains: “I feed on your energy.” 
—Addenda to Orders in Council The Emperor Paul Muad’Dib 
First  Moon  stood  high  over  the  city  as  Paul,  his  shield  activated  and 
shimmering around him, emerged from the cul-de-sac. A wind o? the massif 
whirled sand and dust down the narrow street, causing Bijaz to blink and 
shield his eyes. 
“We must hurry,” the dwarf muttered. “Hurry! Hurry!” 
“You sense danger?” Paul asked, probing. 
“I  know  danger!” 
An abrupt sense of peril very near was followed almost immediately by a 
?gure joining them out of a doorway. 
Bijaz crouched and whimpered. 
It was only Stilgar moving like a war machine, head thrust forward, feet 
striking the street solidly. 
Swiftly,  Paul  explained  the  value  of  the  dwarf,  handed  Bijaz  over  to 
Stilgar. The pace of the vision moved here with great rapidity. Stilgar sped 
away with Bijaz. Security Guards enveloped Paul. Orders were given to send 
men down the street toward the house beyond Otheym’s. The men hurried to 
obey, shadows among shadows. 
More sacri?ces  Paul thought. 
“We want live prisoners,” one of the guard o?cers hissed. 
The sound was a vision-echo in Paul’s ears. It went with solid precision 
here—vision/reality,  tick  for  tick.  Ornithopters  drifted  down  across  the 
moon. 
The night was full of Imperial troopers attacking. 
A soft hiss grew out of the other sounds, climbed to a roar while they still 
heard  the  sibilance.  It  picked  up  a  terra-cotta  glow  that  hid  the  stars, 
engulfed the moon. 
Paul, knowing that sound and glow from the earliest nightmare glimpses 
of his vision, felt an odd sense of ful?llment. It went the way it must. 
“Stone burner!” someone screamed. 
“Stone  burner!”  The  cry  was  all  around  him.  “Stone  burner  …  stone 
burner …” 
Because it was required of him, Paul threw a protective arm across his 
face, dove for the low lip of a curb. It already was too late, of course. 
Where  Otheym’s  house  had  been  there  stood  now  a  pillar  of  ?re,  a 
blinding jet roaring at the heavens. It gave o? a dirty brilliance which threw 
into sharp relief every ballet movement of the ?ghting and ?eeing men, the 
tipping retreat of ornithopters. 
For every member of this frantic throng it was too late. 
The ground grew hot beneath Paul. He heard the sound of running stop. 
Men threw themselves down all around him, every one of them aware that 
there was no point in running. The ?rst damage had been done: and now 
they must wait out the extent of the stone burner’s potency. The things’s 
radiation, which no man could outrun, already had penetrated their ?esh. 
The peculiar result of stone-burner radiation already was at work in them. 
What else this weapon might do now lay in the planning of the men who had 
used it, the men who had de?ed the Great Convention to use it. 
“Gods … a stone burner,” someone whimpered. “I … don’t … want … to 
… be … blind.” 
“Who does?” The harsh voice of a trooper far down the street. 
“The  Tleilaxu  will  sell  many  eyes  here,”  someone  near  Paul  growled. 
“Now shut up and wait!” 
They waited. 
Paul remained silent, thinking what this weapon implied. Too much fuel 
in it and it’d cut its way into the planet’s core. Dune’s molten level lay deep, 
but the more dangerous for that. Such pressures released and out of control 
might split a planet, scattering lifeless bits and pieces through space. 
“I think it’s dying down a bit,” someone said. 
“It’s just digging deeper,” Paul cautioned. “Stay put, all of you. Stilgar 
will be sending help.” 
“Stilgar got away?” 
“Stilgar got away.” 
“The ground’s hot,” someone complained. 
“They dared use atomics!” a trooper near Paul protested. 
“The sound’s diminishing,” someone down the street said. 
Paul ignored the words, concentrated on his ?ngertips against the street. 
He could feel the rolling-rumbling of the thing—deep … deep … 
“My eyes!” someone cried. “I can’t see!” 
Someone closer to it than I was , Paul thought. He still could see to the end 
of the cul-de-sac when he lifted his head, althought there was a mistiness 
across the scene. A red-yellow glow ?lled the area where Otheym’s house 
and its neighbor had been. Pieces of adjoining buildings made dark patterns 
as they crumbled into the glowing pit. 
Paul climbed to his feet. He felt the stone burner die, silence beneath him. 
His body was wet with perspiration against the stillsuit’s slickness—too much 
for the suit to accommodate. The air he drew into his lungs carried the heat 
and sulfur stench of the burner. 
As he looked at the troopers beginning to stand up around him, the mist 
on Paul’s eyes faded into darkness. He summoned up his oracular vision of 
these moments, then turned and strode along the track that Time had carved 
for him, ?tting himself into the vision so tightly that it could not escape. He 
felt himself grow aware of this place as a multitudinous possession, reality 
welded to prediction. 
Moans  and  groans  of  his  troopers  arose  all  around  him  as  the  men 
realized their blindness. 
“Hold  fast!”  Paul  shouted.  “Help  is  coming!”  And,  as  the  complaints 
persisted,  he  said:  “This  is  Muad’Dib!  I  command  you  to  hold  fast!  Help 
comes!” 
Silence. 
Then,  true  to  his  vision,  a  nearby  guardsman  said:  “Is  it  truly  the 
Emperor? Which of you can see? Tell me.” 
“None of us has eyes,” Paul said. “They have taken my eyes, as well, but 
not my vision. I can 
 see  you standing there, a dirty wall within touching 
distance on your left. Now wait bravely. Stilgar comes with our friends.” 
The thwock-thwock of many ’thopters grew louder all around. There was 
the sound of hurrying feet. Paul 
 watched  his friends come, matching their 
sounds to his oracular vision. 
“Stilgar!” Paul shouted, waving an arm. “Over here!” 
“Thanks to Shai-hulud,” Stilgar cried, running up to Paul. “You’re not …” 
In  the  sudden  silence,  Paul’s  vision  showed  him  Stilgar  staring  with  an 
expression  of  agony  at  the  ruined  eyes  of  his  friend  and  Emperor.  “Oh, 
m’Lord,” Stilgar groaned. “Usul… Usul… Usul…” 
“What of the stone burner?” one of the newcomers shouted. 
“It’s ended,” Paul said, raising his voice. He gestured. “Get up there now 
and rescue the ones who were closest to it. Put up barriers. Lively now!” He 
turned back to Stilgar. 
“Do you  see , m’Lord?” Stilgar asked, wonder in his tone. “How can you 
see?” 
For  answer,  Paul  put  a  ?nger  out  to  touch  Stilgar’s  cheek  above  the 
stillsuit mouthcap, felt tears. “You need give no moisture to me, old friend,” 
Paul said. “I am not dead.” 
“But your eyes!” 
“They’ve blinded my body, but not my vision,” Paul said. “Ah, Stil, I live 
in an apocalyptic dream. My steps ?t into it so precisely that I fear most of 
all I will grow bored reliving the thing so exactly.” 
“Usul, I don’t, I don’t …” 
“Don’t try to understand it. Accept it. I am in the world beyond this world 
here. For me, they are the same. I need no hand to guide me. I see every 
movement all around me. I see every expression of your face. I have no eyes, 
yet I see.” 
Stilgar shook his head sharply. “Sire, we must conceal your a?iction from 
—” 
“We hide it from no man,” Paul said. 
“But the law …” 
“We live by the Atreides Law now, Stil. The Fremen Law that the blind 
should be abandoned in the desert applies only to the blind. I am not blind. I 
live in the cycle of being where the war of good and evil has its arena. We 
are at a turning point in the succession of ages and we have our parts to 
play.” 
In a sudden stillness, Paul heard one of the wounded being led past him. 
“It was terrible,” the man groaned, “a great fury of ?re.” 
“None of these men shah be taken into the desert,” Paul said. “You hear 
me, Stil?” 
“I hear you, m’Lord.” 
“They are to be ?tted with new eyes at my expense.” 
“It will be done, m’Lord.” 
Paul,  hearing  the  awe  grow  in  Stilgar’s  voice,  said:  “I  will  be  at  the 
Command ’thopter. Take charge here.” 
“Yes, m’Lord.” 
Paul stepped around Stilgar, strode down the street. His vision told him 
every  movement,  every  irregularity  beneath  his  feet,  every  face  he 
encountered. He gave orders as he moved, pointing to men of his personal 
entourage,  calling  out  names,  summoning  to  himself  the  ones  who 
represented the intimate apparatus of government. He could feel the terror 
grow behind him, the fearful whispers. 
“His eyes!” 
“But he looked right at you, called you by name!” 
At the Command ’thopter, he deactivated his personal shield, reached into 
the  machine  and  took  the  microphone  from  the  hand  of  a  startled 
communications o?cer, issued a swift string of orders, thrust the microphone 
back into the o?cer’s hand. Turning, Paul summoned a weapons specialist, 
one of the eager and brilliant new breed who remembered sietch life only 
dimly. 
“They used a stone burner,” Paul said. 
After the briefest pause, the man said: “So I was told, Sire.” 
“You know what that means, of course.” 
“The fuel could only have been atomic.” 
Paul nodded, thinking of how this man’s mind must be racing. Atomics. 
The Great Convention prohibited such weapons. Discovery of the perpetrator 
would bring down the combined retributive assault of the Great Houses. Old 
feuds would be forgotten, discarded in the face of this threat and the ancient 
fears it aroused. 
“It cannot have been manufactured without leaving some traces,” Paul 
said.  “You  will  assemble  the  proper  equipment  and  search  out  the  place 
where the stone burner was made.” 
“At once, Sire.” With one last fearful glance, the man sped away. 
“M’Lord,” the communications o?cer ventured from behind him. “Your 
eyes …” 
Paul turned, reached into the ’thopter, returned the command set to his 
personal band. “Call Chani,” he ordered. “Tell her … tell her I am alive and 
will be with her soon.” 
Now the forces gather , Paul thought. And he noted how strong was the 
smell of fear in the perspiration all around. 
He has gone from Alia , 
The womb of heaven! 
Holy, holy, holy! 
Fire-sand leagues 
Confront our lord . 
He can see 
Without eyes! 
A demon upon him! 
Holy, holy, holy 
Equation: 
He solved for 
Martyrdom! 
—The Moon Falls Down Songs of Muad’Dib 
After seven days of radiating fevered activity, the Keep took on an unnatural 
quiet. On this morning, there were people about, but they spoke in whispers, 
heads close together, and they walked softly. Some scurried with an oddly 
furtive gait. The sight of a guard detail coming in from the forecourt drew 
questioning looks and frowns at the noise which the newcomers brought with 
their trampling about and stacking of weapons. The newcomers caught the 
mood of the interior, though, and began moving in that furtive way. 
Talk of the stone burner still ?oated around: “He said the ?re had blue- 
green in it and a smell out of hell.” 
“Elpa is a fool! He says he’ll commit suicide rather than take Tleilaxu 
eyes.” 
“I don’t like talk of eyes.” 
“Muad’Dib passed me and called me by name!” 
“How does  He  see without eyes?” 
“People are leaving, had you heard? There’s great fear. The Naibs say 
they’ll go to Sietch Makab for a Grand Council.” 
“What’ve they done with the Panegyrist?” 
“I saw them take him into the chamber where the Naibs are meeting. 
Imagine Korba a prisoner!” 
Chani had arisen early, awakened by a stillness in the Keep. Awakening, 
she’d found Paul sitting up beside her, his eyeless sockets aimed at some 
formless  place  beyond  the  far  wall  of  their  bedchamber.  What  the  stone 
burner had done with its peculiar a?nity for eye tissue, all that ruined ?esh 
had  been  removed.  Injections  and  unguents  had  saved  the  stronger  ?esh 
around the sockets, but she felt that the radiation had gone deeper. 
Ravenous hunger seized her as she sat up. She fed on the food kept by the 
bedside—spicebread, a heavy cheese. 
Paul gestured at the food. “Beloved, there was no way to spare you this. 
Believe me.” 
Chani stilled a ?t of trembling when he aimed those empty sockets at her. 
She’d given up asking him to explain. He spoke so oddly: 
 “I was baptized in 
sand and it cost me the knack of believing. Who trades in faiths anymore? Who’ll 
buy? Who’ll sell?” 
What could he mean by such words? 
He refused even to consider Tleilaxu eyes, although he bought them with 
a lavish hand for the men who’d shared his a?iction. 
Hunger satis?ed, Chani slipped from bed, glanced back at Paul, noted his 
tiredness. Grim lines framed his mouth. The dark hair stood up, mussed from 
a sleep that hadn’t healed. He appeared so saturnine and remote. The back 
and  forth  of  waking  and  sleeping  did  nothing  to  change  this.  She  forced 
herself to turn away, whispered: “My love … my love …” 
He leaned over, pulled her back into the bed, kissed her cheeks. “Soon 
we’ll go back to our desert,” he whispered. “Only a few things remain to be 
done here.” 
She trembled at the ?nality in his voice. 
He tightened his arms around her, murmured: “Don’t fear me, my Sihaya. 
Forget mystery and accept love. There’s no mystery about love. It comes from 
life. Can’t you feel that?” 
“Yes.” 
She put a palm against his chest, counting his heartbeats. His love cried 
out to the Fremen spirit in her—torrential, outpouring, savage. A magnetic 
power enveloped her. 
“I promise you a thing, beloved,” he said. “A child of ours will rule such 
an empire that mine will fade in comparison. Such achievements of living 
and art and sublime—” 
“We’re here now! “she protested, ?ghting a dry sob. “And … I feel we 
have so little … time.” 
“We have eternity, beloved.” 
“ You  may have eternity. I have only now.” 
“But this  eternity.” He stroked her forehead.  is 
She pressed against him, lips on his neck. The pressure agitated the life in 
her womb. She felt it stir. 
Paul felt it, too. He put a hand on her abdomen, said: “Ahh, little ruler of 
the universe, wait your time. This moment is mine.” 
She  wondered  then  why  he  always  spoke  of  the  life  within  her  as 
singular. Hadn’t the medics told him? She searched back in her own memory, 
curious  that  the  subject  had  never  arisen  between  them.  Surely,  he  must 
know she carried twins. She hesitated on the point of raising this question. 
He 
 must  know. He knew everything. He knew all the things that were herself. 
His hands, his mouth—all of him knew her. 
Presently, she said: “Yes, love. This is forever … this is real.” And she 
closed her eyes tightly lest sight of his dark sockets stretch her soul from 
paradise to hell. No matter the 
 rihani  magic in which he’d enciphered their 
lives, his ?esh remained real, his caresses could not be denied. 
When they arose to dress for the day, she said: “If the people only knew 
your love …” 
But his mood had changed. “You can’t build politics on love,” he said. 
“People  aren’t  concerned  with  love;  it’s  too  disordered.  They  prefer 
despotism. Too much freedom breeds chaos. We can’t have that, can we? 
And how do you make despotism lovable?” 
“You’re not a despot!” she protested, tying her scarf. “Your laws are just.” 
“Ahh, laws,” he said. He crossed to the window, pulled back the draperies 
as though he could look out. “What’s law? Control? Law ?lters chaos and 
what drips through? Serenity? Law—our highest ideal and our basest nature. 
Don’t  look  too  closely  at  the  law.  Do,  and  you’ll  ?nd  the  rationalized 
interpretations, the legal casuistry, the precedents of convenience. You’ll ?nd 
the serenity, which is just another word for death.” 
Chani’s mouth drew into a tight line. She couldn’t deny his wisdom and 
sagacity, but these moods frightened her. He turned upon himself and she 
sensed internal wars. It was as though he took the Fremen maxim, “ Never to 
forgive—never to forget 
,” and whipped his own ?esh with it. 
She crossed to his side, stared past him at an angle. The growing heat of 
the day had begun pulling the north wind out of these protected latitudes. 
The  wind  painted  a  false  sky  full  of  ochre  plumes  and  sheets  of  crystal, 
strange  designs  in  rushing  gold  and  red.  High  and  cold,  the  wind  broke 
against the Shield Wall with fountains of dust. 
Paul felt Chani’s warmth beside him. Momentarily, he lowered a curtain 
of forgetfulness across his vision. He might just be standing here with his 
eyes closed. Time refused to stand still for him, though. He inhaled darkness 
—starless, tearless. His a?iction dissolved substance until all that remained 
was  astonishment  at  the  way  sounds  condensed  his  universe.  Everything 
around him leaned on his lonely sense of hearing, falling back only when he 
touched objects: the drapery, Chani’s hand … He caught himself listening for 
Chani’s breaths. 
Where was the insecurity of things that were only probable? he asked 
himself. His mind carried such a burden of mutilated memories. For every 
instant of reality there existed countless projections, things fated never to be. 
An  invisible  self  within  him  remembered  the  false  pasts,  their  burden 
threatening at times to overwhelm the present. 
Chani leaned against his arm. 
He felt his body through her touch: dead ?esh carried by time eddies. He 
reeked of memories that had glimpsed eternity. To see eternity was to be 
exposed to eternity’s whims, oppressed by endless dimensions. The oracle’s 
false  immortality  demanded  retribution:  Past  and  Future  became 
simultaneous. 
Once more, the vision arose from its black pit, locked onto him. It was his 
eyes. It moved his muscles. It guided him into the next moment, the next 
hour, the next day … until he felt himself to be always 
 there! 
“It’s time we were going,” Chani said. “The Council …” 
“Alia will be there to stand in my place.” 
“Does she know what to do?” 
“She knows.” 
Alia’s day began with a guard squadron swarming into the parade yard 
below  her  quarters.  She  stared  down  at  a  scene  of  frantic  confusion, 
clamorous and intimidating babble. The scene became intelligible only when 
she recognized the prisoner they’d brought: Korba, the Panegyrist. 
She  made  her  morning  toilet,  moving  occasionally  to  the  window, 
keeping  watch  on  the  progress  of  impatience  down  there.  Her  gaze  kept 
straying  to  Korba.  She  tried  to  remember  him  as  the  rough  and  bearded 
commander of the third wave in the battle of Arrakeen. It was impossible. 
Korba had become an immaculate fop dressed now in a Parato silk robe of 
exquisite cut. It lay open to the waist, revealing a beautifully laundered ru? 
and embroidered undercoat set with green gems. A purple belt gathered the 
waist. The sleeves poking through the robe’s armhole slits had been tailored 
into rivulet ridges of dark green and black velvet. 
A few Naibs had come out to observe the treatment accorded a fellow 
Fremen.  They’d  brought  on  the  clamor,  exciting  Korba  to  protest  his 
innocence. Alia moved her gaze across the Fremen faces, trying to recapture 
memories of the original men. The present blotted out the past. They’d all 
become hedonists, samplers of pleasures most men couldn’t even imagine. 
Their  uneasy  glances,  she  saw,  strayed  often  to  the  doorway  into  the 
chamber where they would meet. They were thinking of Muad’Dib’s blind- 
sight, a new manifestation of mysterious powers. By their law, a blind man 
should be abandoned in the desert, his water given up to Shai-hulud. But 
eyeless Muad’Dib saw them. They disliked buildings, too, and felt vulnerable 
in space built above the ground. Give them a proper cave cut from rock, then 
they could relax—but not here, not with this new Muad’Dib waiting 
 inside . 
As she turned to go down to the meeting, she saw the letter where she’d 
left it on a table by the door: the latest message from their mother. Despite 
the special reverence held for Caladan as the place of Paul’s birth, the Lady 
Jessica had emphasized her refusal to make her planet a stop on the hajj. 
“No doubt my son is an epochal ?gure of history,” she’d written, “but I 
cannot see this as an excuse for submitting to a rabble invasion.” 
Alia touched the letter, experienced an odd sensation of mutual contact. 
This paper had been in her mother’s hands. Such an archaic device, the letter 
—but personal in a way no recording could achieve. Written in the Atreides 
Battle  Tongue,  it  represented  an  almost  invulnerable  privacy  of 
communication. 
Thinking of her mother a?icted Alia with the usual inward blurring. The 
spice change that had mixed the psyches of mother and daughter forced her 
at times to think of Paul as a son to whom she had given birth. The capsule- 
complex of oneness could present her own father as a lover. Ghost shadows 
cavorted in her mind, people of possibility. 
Alia reviewed the letter as she walked down the ramp to the antechamber 
where her guard amazons waited. 
“You  produce  a  deadly  paradox,”  Jessica  had  written.  “Government 
cannot be religious and self-assertive at the same time. Religious experience 
needs a spontaneity which laws inevitably suppress. And you cannot govern 
without  laws.  Your  laws  eventually  must  replace  morality,  replace 
conscience, replace even the religion by which you think to govern. Sacred 
ritual  must  spring  from  praise  and  holy  yearnings  which  hammer  out  a 
signi?cant morality. Government, on the other hand, is a cultural organism 
particularly  attractive  to  doubts,  questions  and  contentions.  I  see  the  day 
coming when ceremony must take the place of faith and symbolism replaces 
morality.” 
The  smell  of  spice-co?ee  greeted  Alia  in  the  antechamber.  Four  guard 
amazons in green watchrobes came to attention as she entered. They fell into 
step behind her, striding ?rmly in the bravado of their youth, eyes alert for 
trouble. They had zealot faces untouched by awe. They radiated that special 
Fremen quality of violence: they could kill casually with no sense of guilt. 
In this, I am di?erent , Alia thought.  The Atreides name has enough dirt on it 
without that 
. 
Word preceded her. A waiting page darted o? as she entered the lower 
hall,  running  to  summon  the  full  guard  detail.  The  hall  stretched  out 
windowless  and  gloomy,  illuminated  only  by  a  few  subdued  glowglobes. 
Abruptly, the doors to the parade yard opened wide at the far end to admit a 
glaring shaft of daylight. The guard with Korba in their midst wavered into 
view from the outside with the light behind them. 
“Where is Stilgar?” Alia demanded. 
“Already inside,” one of her amazons said. 
Alia  led  the  way  into  the  chamber.  It  was  one  of  the  Keep’s  more 
pretentious meeting places. A high balcony with rows of soft seats occupied 
one side. Across from the balcony, orange draperies had been pulled back 
from tall windows. Bright sunlight poured through from an open space with 
a garden and a fountain. At the near end of the chamber on her right stood a 
dais with a single massive chair. 
Moving to the chair, Alia glanced back and up, saw the gallery ?lled with 
Naibs. 
Household guardsmen packed the open space beneath the gallery, Stilgar 
moving among them with a quiet word here, a command there. He gave no 
sign that he’d seen Alia enter. 
Korba was brought in, seated at a low table with cushions beside it on the 
chamber  ?oor  below  the  dais.  Despite  his  ?nery,  the  Panegyrist  gave  the 
appearance now of a surly, sleepy old man huddled up in his robes as against 
the outer cold. Two guardsmen took up positions behind him. 
Stilgar approached the dais as Alia seated herself. 
“Where is Muad’Dib?” he asked. 
“My brother has delegated me to preside as Reverend Mother,” Alia said. 
Hearing this, the Naibs in the gallery began raising their voices in protest. 
“Silence!”  Alia  commanded.  In  the  abrupt  quiet,  she  said:  “Is  it  not 
Fremen  law  that  a  Reverend  Mother  presides  when  life  and  death  are  at 
issue?” 
As the gravity of her statement penetrated, stillness came over the Naibs, 
but Alia marked angry stares across the rows of faces. She named them in her 
mind for discussion in Council—Hobars, Raji?ri, Tasmin, Saajid, Umbu, Legg 
… The names carried pieces of Dune in them: Umbu Sietch, Tasmin Sink, 
Hobars Gap … 
She turned her attention to Korba. 
Observing  her  attention,  Korba  lifted  his  chin,  said:  “I  protest  my 
innocence.” 
“Stilgar, read the charges,” Alia said. 
Stilgar produced a brown spicepaper scroll, stepped forward. He began 
reading, a solemn ?ourish in his voice as though to hidden rhythms. He gave 
the words an incisive quality, clear and full of probity: 
“…that you did conspire with traitors to accomplish the destruction of 
our  Lord  and  Emperor;  that  you  did  meet  in  vile  secrecy  with  diverse 
enemies of the realm; that you …” 
Korba kept shaking his head with a look of pained anger. 
Alia listened broodingly, chin planted on her left ?st, head cocked to that 
side,  the  other  arm  extended  along  the  chair  arm.  Bits  of  the  formal 
procedure  began  dropping  out  of  her  awareness,  screened  by  her  own 
feelings of disquiet. 
“…  venerable  tradition  …  support  of  the  legions  and  all  Fremen 
everywhere…violence met with violence according to the Law…majesty of 
the Imperial Person … forfeit all rights to …” 
It was nonsense, she thought. Nonsense! All of it—nonsense … nonsense 
… nonsense … 
Stilgar ?nished: “Thus the issue is brought to judgment.” 
In  the  immediate  silence,  Korba  rocked  forward,  hands  gripping  his 
knees, veined neck stretched as though he were preparing to leap. His tongue 
?icked between his teeth as he spoke. 
“Not by word or deed have I been traitor to my Fremen vows! I demand 
to confront my accuser!” 
A simple enough protest , Alia thought. 
And she saw that it had produced a considerable e?ect on the Naibs. They 
knew Korba. He was one of them. To become a Naib, he’d proved his Fremen 
courage and caution. Not brilliant, Korba, but reliable. Not one to lead a 
Jihad, perhaps, but a good choice as supply o?cer. Not a crusader, but one 
who cherished the old Fremen virtues:  The Tribe is paramount . 
Otheym’s  bitter  words  as  Paul  had  recited  them  swept  through  Alia’s 
mind. She scanned the gallery. Any of those men might see himself in Korba’s 
place—some for good reason. But an innocent Naib was as dangerous as a 
guilty one here. 
Korba felt it, too. “Who accuses me?” he demanded. “I have a Fremen 
right to confront my accuser.” 
“Perhaps you accuse yourself,” Alia said. 
Before he could mask it, mystical terror lay brie?y on Korba’s face. It was 
there for anyone to read: 
 With her powers, Alia had but to accuse him herself, 
saying she brought the evidence from the shadow region, the 
 alam al-mythal. 
“Our enemies have Fremen allies,” Alia pressed. “Water traps have been 
destroyed, qanats blasted, plantings poisoned and storage basins plundered 
…” 
“And now—they’ve stolen a worm from the desert, taken it to another 
world!” 
The voice of this intrusion was known to all of them—Muad’Dib. Paul 
came through the doorway from the hall, pressed through the guard ranks 
and  crossed  to  Alia’s  side.  Chani,  accompanying  him,  remained  on  the 
sidelines. 
“M’Lord,” Stilgar said, refusing to look at Paul’s face. 
Paul aimed his empty sockets at the gallery, then down to Korba. “What, 
Korba—no words of praise?” 
Muttering could be heard in the gallery. It grew louder, isolated words 
and phrases audible: “… law for the blind … Fremen way… in the desert… 
who breaks …” 
“Who  says  I’m  blind?”  Paul  demanded.  He  faced  the  gallery.  “You, 
Raji?ri? I see you’re wearing gold today, and that blue shirt beneath it which 
still has dust on it from the streets. You always were untidy.” 
Raji?ri made a warding gesture, three ?ngers against evil. 
“Point those ?ngers at yourself!” Paul shouted. “We know where the evil 
is!” He turned back to Korba. “There’s guilt on your face, Korba.” 
“Not my guilt! I may’ve associated with the guilty, but no …”He broke 
o?, shot a frightened look at the gallery. 
Taking her cue from Paul, Alia arose, stepped down to the ?oor of the 
chamber, advanced to the edge of Korba’s table. From a range of less than a 
meter, she stared down at him, silent and intimidating. 
Korba  cowered  under  the  burden  of  eyes.  He  ?dgeted,  shot  anxious 
glances at the gallery. 
“Whose eyes do you seek up there?” Paul asked. 
“You cannot see!” Korba blurted. 
Paul  put  down  a  momentary  feeling  of  pity  for  Korba.  The  man  lay 
trapped in the vision’s snare as securely as any of those present. He played a 
part, no more. 
“I don’t need eyes to see you,” Paul said. And he began describing Korba, 
every  movement,  every  twitch,  every  alarmed  and  pleading  look  at  the 
gallery. 
Desperation grew in Korba. 
Watching  him,  Alia  saw  he  might  break  any  second.  Someone  in  the 
gallery must realize how near he was to breaking, she thought. Who? She 
studied the faces of the Naibs, noting small betrayals in the masked faces … 
angers, fears, uncertainties … guilts. 
Paul fell silent. 
Korba mustered a pitiful air of pomposity to plead: “Who accuses me?” 
“Otheym accuses you,” Alia said. 
“But Otheym’s dead!” Korba protested. 
“How did you know that?” Paul asked. “Through your spy system? Oh, 
yes!  We  know  about  your  spies  and  couriers.  We  know  who  brought  the 
stone burner here from Tarahell.” 
“It was for the defense of the Qizarate!” Korba blurted. 
“Is that how it got into traitorous hands?” Paul asked. 
“It was stolen and we …” Korba fell silent, swallowed. His gaze darted 
left and right. “Everyone knows I’ve been the voice of love for Muad’Dib.” He 
stared at the gallery. “How can a dead man accuse a Fremen?” 
“Otheym’s voice isn’t dead,” Alia said. She stopped as Paul touched her 
arm. 
“Otheym sent us his voice,” Paul said. “It gives the names, the acts of 
treachery, the meeting places and the times. Do you miss certain faces in the 
Council of Naibs, Korba? Where are Merkur and Fash? Keke the Lame isn’t 
with us today. And Takim, where is he?” 
Korba shook his head from side to side. 
“They’ve ?ed Arrakis with the stolen worm,” Paul said. “Even if I freed 
you now, Korba, Shai-hulud would have your water for your part in this. 
Why don’t I free you, Korba? Think of all those men whose eyes were taken, 
the men who cannot see as I see. They have families and friends, Korba. 
Where could you hide from them?” 
“It was an accident,” Korba pleaded. “Anyway, they’re getting Tleilaxu 
…” Again, he subsided. 
“Who knows what bondage goes with metal eyes?” Paul asked. 
The  Naibs  in  their  gallery  began  exchanging  whispered  comments, 
speaking behind raised hands. They gazed coldly at Korba now. 
“Defense of the Qizarate,” Paul murmured, returning to Korba’s plea. “A 
device which either destroys a planet or produces J-rays to blind those too 
near  it.  Which  e?ect,  Korba,  did  you  conceive  as  a  defense?  Does  the 
Qizarate rely on stopping the eyes of all observers?” 
“It was a curiosity, m’Lord,” Korba pleaded. “We knew the Old Law said 
that only Families could possess atomics, but the Qizarate obeyed … obeyed 
…” 
“Obeyed you,” Paul said. “A curiosity, indeed.” 
“Even if it’s only the voice of my accuser, you must face me with it!” 
Korba said. “A Fremen has rights.” 
“He speaks truth, Sire,” Stilgar said. 
Alia glanced sharply at Stilgar. 
“The law is the law,” Stilgar said, sensing Alia’s protest. He began quoting 
Fremen Law, interspersing his own comments on how the Law pertained. 
Alia experienced the odd sensation she was hearing Stilgar’s words before 
he spoke them. How could he be this credulous? Stilgar had never appeared 
more o?cial and conservative, more intent on adhering to the Dune Code. 
His  chin  was  outthrust,  aggressive.  His  mouth  chopped.  Was  there  really 
nothing in him but this outrageous pomposity? 
“Korba  is  a  Fremen  and  must  be  judged  by  Fremen  Law,”  Stilgar 
concluded. 
Alia turned away, looked out at the day shadows dropping down the wall 
across from the garden. She felt drained by frustration. They’d dragged this 
thing  along  well  into  midmorning.  Now,  what?  Korba  had  relaxed.  The 
Panegyrist’s manner said he’d su?ered an unjust attack, that everything he’d 
done had been for love of Muad’Dib. She glanced at Korba, surprised a look 
of sly self-importance sliding across his face. 
He might almost have received a message, she thought. He acted the part 
of a man who’d heard friends shout: 
 “Hold fast! Help is on its way!” 
For an instant, they’d held this thing in their hands—the information out 
of the dwarf, the clues that others were in the plot, the names of informants. 
But  the  critical  moment  had  ?own. 
  Stilgar?  Surely  not  Stilgar .  She  turned, 
stared at the old Fremen. 
Stilgar met her gaze without ?inching. 
“Thank you, Stil,” Paul said, “for reminding us of the Law.” 
Stilgar inclined his head. He moved close, shaped silent words in a way 
he knew both Paul and Alia could read. 
 I’ll wring him dry and then take care of 
the matter 
. 
Paul nodded, signaled the guardsmen behind Korba. 
“Remove  Korba  to  a  maximum  security  cell,”  Paul  said.  “No  visitors 
except counsel. As counsel, I appoint Stilgar.” 
“Let me choose my own counsel!” Korba shouted. 
Paul whirled. “You deny the fairness and judgment of Stilgar?” 
“Oh, no, m’Lord, but …” 
“Take him away!” Paul barked. 
The guardsmen lifted Korba o? the cushions, herded him out. 
With new mutterings, the Naibs began quitting their gallery. Attendants 
came from beneath the gallery, crossed to the windows and drew the orange 
draperies. Orange gloom took over the chamber. 
“Paul,” Alia said. 
“When we precipitate violence,” Paul said, “it’ll be when we have full 
control of it. Thank you, Stil; you played your part well. Alia, I’m certain, has 
identi?ed  the  Naibs  who  were  with  him.  They  couldn’t  help  giving 
themselves away.” 
“You cooked this up between you?” Alia demanded. 
“Had  I  ordered  Korba  slain  out  of  hand,  the  Naibs  would  have 
understood,” Paul said. “But this formal procedure without strict adherence 
to  Fremen  Law—they  felt  their  own  rights  threatened.  Which  Naibs  were 
with him, Alia?” 
“Raji?ri for certain,” she said, voice low. “And Saajid, but …” 
“Give Stilgar the complete list,” Paul said. 
Alia swallowed in a thy throat, sharing the general fear of Paul in this 
moment.  She  knew  how  he  moved  among  them  without  eyes,  but  the 
delicacy of it daunted her. To see their forms in the air of his vision! She 
sensed her person shimmering for him in a sidereal time whose accord with 
reality depended entirely on his words and actions. He held them all in the 
palm of his vision! 
“It’s  past  time  for  your  morning  audience,  Sire,”  Stilgar  said.  “Many 
people—curious … afraid …” 
“Are you afraid, Stil?” 
It was barely a whisper: “Yes.” 
“You’re my friend and have nothing to fear from me,” Paul said. 
Stilgar swallowed. “Yes, m’Lord.” 
“Alia, take the morning audience,” Paul said. “Stilgar, give the signal.” 
Stilgar obeyed. 
A ?urry of movement erupted at the great doors. A crowd was pressed 
back from the shadowy room to permit entrance of o?cials. Many things 
began  happening  all  at  once:  the  household  guard  elbowing  and  shoving 
back  the  press  of  Supplicants,  garishly  robed  Pleaders  trying  to  break 
through, shouts, curses. Pleaders waved the papers of their calling. The Clerk 
of the Assemblage strode ahead of them through the opening cleared by the 
guard.  He  carried  the  List  of  Preferences,  those  who’d  be  permitted  to 
approach  the  Throne.  The  Clerk,  a  wiry  Fremen  named  Tecrube,  carried 
himself with weary cynicism, ?aunting his shaven head, clumped whiskers. 
Alia moved to intercept him, giving Paul time to slip away with Chani 
through the private passage behind the dais. She experienced a momentary 
distrust of Tecrube at the prying curiosity in the stare he sent after Paul. 
“I speak for my brother today,” she said. “Have the Supplicants approach 
one at a time.” 
“Yes, m’Lady.” He turned to arrange his throng. 
“I can remember a time when you wouldn’t have mistaken your brother’s 
purpose here,” Stilgar said. 
“I was distracted,” she said. “There’s been a dramatic change in you, Stil. 
What is it?” 
Stilgar  drew  himself  up,  shocked.  One  changed,  of  course.  But 
dramatically?  This  was  a  particular  view  of  himself  that  he’d  never 
encountered.  Drama  was  a  questionable  thing.  Imported  entertainers  of 
dubious  loyalty  and  more  dubious  virtue  were  dramatic.  Enemies  of  the 
Empire employed drama in their attempts to sway the ?ckle populace. Korba 
had slipped away from Fremen virtues to employ drama for the Qizarate. 
And he’d die for that. 
“You’re being perverse,” Stilgar said. “Do you distrust me?” 
The distress in his voice softened her expression, but not her tone. “You 
know   I  don’t  distrust  you.  I’ve  always  agreed  with  my  brother  that  once 
matters were in Stilgar’s hands we could safely forget them.” 
“Then why do you say I’ve … changed?” 
“You’re preparing to disobey my brother,” she said. “I can read it in you. I 
only hope it doesn’t destroy you both.” 
The  ?rst  of  the  Pleaders  and  Supplicants  were  approaching  now.  She 
turned away before Stilgar could respond. His face, though, was ?lled with 
the things she’d sensed in her mother’s letter—the replacement of morality 
and conscience with law. 
“You produce a deadly paradox.” 
Tibana was an apologist for Socratic Christianity, probably a native of IV Anbus 
who lived between the eighth and ninth centuries before Corrino, likely in the 
second reign of Dalamak. Of his writings, only a portion survives from which 
this fragment is taken: “The hearts of all men dwell in the same wilderness.” 
—from The Dunebuk of Irulan 
“You are Bijaz,” the ghola said, entering the small chamber where the dwarf 
was held under guard. “I am called Hayt.” 
A strong contingent of the household guard had come in with the ghola to 
take over the evening watch. Sand carried by the sunset wind had stung their 
cheeks while they crossed the outer yard, made them blink and hurry. They 
could be heard in the passage outside now exchanging the banter and ritual 
of their tasks. 
“You are not Hayt,” the dwarf said. “You are Duncan Idaho. I was there 
when  they  put  your  dead  ?esh  into  the  tank  and  I  was  there  when  they 
removed it, alive and ready for training.” 
The ghola swallowed in a throat suddenly dry. The bright glowglobes of 
the chamber lost their yellowness in the room’s green hangings. The light 
showed  beads  of  perspiration  on  the  dwarf’s  forehead.  Bijaz  seemed  a 
creature of odd integrity, as though the purpose fashioned into him by the 
Tleilaxu were projected out through his skin. There was power beneath the 
dwarf’s mask of cowardice and frivolity. 
“Muad’Dib has charged me to question you to determine what it is the 
Tleilaxu intend you to do here,” Hayt said. 
“Tleilaxu, Tleilaxu,” the dwarf sang. “I am the Tleilaxu, you dolt! For that 
matter, so are you.” 
Hayt stared at the dwarf. Bijaz radiated a charismatic alertness that made 
the observer think of ancient idols. 
“You hear that guard outside?” Hayt asked. “If I gave them the order, 
they’d strangle you.” 
“Hai! Hai!” Bijaz cried. “What a callous lout you’ve become. And you said 
you came seeking truth.” 
Hayt found he didn’t like the look of secret repose beneath the dwarf’s 
expression. “Perhaps I only seek the future,” he said. 
“Well spoken,” Bijaz said. “Now we know each other. When two thieves 
meet they need no introduction.” 
“So we’re thieves,” Hayt said. “What do we steal?” 
“Not thieves, but dice,” Bijaz said. “And you came here to read my spots. 
I, in turn, read yours. And lo! You have two faces!” 
“Did you really see me go into the Tleilaxu tanks?” Hayt asked, ?ghting 
an odd reluctance to ask that question. 
“Did I not say it?” Bijaz demanded. The dwarf bounced to his feet. “We 
had a terri?c struggle with you. The ?esh did not want to come back.” 
Hayt felt suddenly that he existed in a dream controlled by some other 
mind,  and  that  he  might  momentarily  forget  this  to  become  lost  in  the 
convolutions of that mind. 
Bijaz  tipped  his  head  slyly  to  one  side,  walked  all  around  the  ghola, 
staring up at him. “Excitement kindles old patterns in you,” Bijaz said. “You 
are the pursuer who doesn’t want to ?nd what he pursues.” 
“You’re a weapon aimed at Muad’Dib,” Hayt said, swiveling to follow the 
dwarf. “What is it you’re to do?” 
“Nothing!”  Bijaz  said,  stopping.  “I  give  you  a  common  answer  to  a 
common question.” 
“Then you were aimed at Alia,” Hayt said. “Is she your target?” 
“They  call  her  Hawt,  the  Fish  Monster,  on  the  outworlds,”  Bijaz  said. 
“How is it I hear your blood boiling when you speak of her?” 
“So they call her Hawt,” the ghola said, studying Bijaz for any clue to his 
purpose. The dwarf made such odd responses. 
“She is the virgin-harlot,” Bijaz said. “She is vulgar, witty, knowledgeable 
to a depth that terri?es, cruel when she is most kind, unthinking while she 
thinks, and when she seeks to build she is as destructive as a coriolis storm.” 
“So you came here to speak out against Alia,” Hayt said. 
“Against her?” Bijaz sank to a cushion against the wall. “I came here to be 
captured by the magnetism of her physical beauty.” He grinned, a saurian 
expression in the big-featured face. 
“To attack Alia is to attack her brother,” Hayt said. 
“That is so clear it is di?cult to see,” Bijaz said. “In truth, Emperor and 
sister are one person back to back, one being, half male and half female.” 
“That is a thing we’ve heard said by the Fremen of the deep desert,” Hayt 
said.  “And  those are the  ones who’ve revived the  blood  sacri?ce to Shai- 
hulud. How is it you repeat their nonsense?” 
“You dare say nonsense?” Bijaz demanded. “You, who are both man and 
mask? Ahh, but the dice cannot read their own spots. I forget this. And you 
are  doubly  confused  because  you  serve  the  Atreides  double-being.  Your 
senses are not as close to the answer as your mind is.” 
“Do you preach that false ritual about Muad’Dib to your guards?” Hayt 
asked, his voice low. He felt his mind being tangled by the dwarf’s words. 
“They preach to me!” Bijaz said. “And they pray. Why should they not? 
All of us should pray. Do we not live in the shadow of the most dangerous 
creation the universe has ever seen?” 
“Dangerous creation …” 
“Their own mother refuses to live on the same planet with them!” 
“Why don’t you answer me straight out?” Hayt demanded. “You know we 
have other ways of questioning you. We’ll get our answers … one way or 
another.” 
“But I have answered you! Have I not said the myth is real? Am I the 
wind  that  carries  death  in  its  belly?  No!  I  am  words!  Such  words  as  the 
lightning which strikes from the sand in a dark sky. I have said: ’Blow out the 
lamp! Day is here!’ And you keep saying: ‘Give me a lamp so I can ?nd the 
day.’” 
“You play a dangerous game with me,” Hayt said. “Did you think I could 
not understand these Zensunni ideas? You leave tracks as clear as those of a 
bird in mud.” 
Bijaz began to giggle. 
“Why do you laugh?” Hayt demanded. 
“Because  I  have  teeth  and  wish  I  had  not,”  Bijaz  managed  between 
giggles. “Having no teeth, I could not gnash them.” 
“And now I know your target,” Hayt said. “You were aimed at me.” 
“And I’ve hit it right on!” Bijaz said. “You made such a big target, how 
could I miss?” He nodded as though to himself. “Now I will sing to you.” He 
began to hum, a keening, whining monotonous theme, repeated over and 
over. 
Hayt sti?ened, experiencing odd pains that played up and down his spine. 
He stared at the face of the dwarf, seeing youthful eyes in an old face. The 
eyes were the center of a network of knobby white lines which ran to the 
hollows below his temples. Such a large head! Every feature focused on the 
pursed-up mouth from which that monotonous noise issued. The sound made 
Hayt think of ancient rituals, folk memories, old words and customs, half- 
forgotten meanings in lost mutterings. Something vital was happening here— 
a bloody play of ideas across Time. Elder ideas lay tangled in the dwarf’s 
singing. It was like a blazing light in the distance, coming nearer and nearer, 
illuminating life across a span of centuries. 
“What are you doing to me?” Hayt gasped. 
“You are the instrument I was taught to play,” Bijaz said. “I am playing 
you. Let me tell you the names of the other traitors among the Naibs. They 
are  Bikouros  and  Cahueit.  There  is  Djedida,  who  was  secretary  to  Korba. 
There is Abumojandis, the aide to Bannerjee. Even now, one of them could 
be sinking a blade into your Muad’Dib.” 
Hayt shook his head from side to side. He found it too di?cult to talk. 
“We are like brothers,” Bijaz said, interrupting his monotonous hum once 
more. “We grew in the same tank: I ?rst and then you.” 
Hayt’s metal eyes in?icted him with a sudden burning pain. Flickering red 
haze surrounded everything he saw. He felt he had been cut away from every 
immediate  sense  except  the  pain,  and  he  experienced  his  surroundings 
through a thin separation like windblown gauze. All had become accident, 
the chance involvement of inanimate matter. His own will was no more than 
a subtle, shifting thing. It lived without breath and was intelligible only as an 
inward illumination. 
With a clarity born of desperation, he broke through the gauze curtain 
with the lonely sense of sight. His attention focused like a blazing light under 
Bijaz. Hayt felt that his eyes cut through layers of the dwarf, seeing the little 
man as a hired intellect, and beneath that, a creature imprisoned by hungers 
and cravings which lay huddled in the eyes—layer after layer, until ?nally, 
there was only an entity-aspect being manipulated by symbols. 
“We are upon a battleground,” Bijaz said. “You may speak of it.” 
His voice freed by the command, Hayt said: “You cannot force me to slay 
Muad’Dib.” 
“I have heard the Bene Gesserit say,” Bijaz said, “that there is nothing 
?rm,  nothing  balanced,  nothing  durable  in  all  the  universe—that  nothing 
remains in its state, that each day, sometimes each hour, brings change.” 
Hayt shook his head dumbly from side to side. 
“You  believed  the  silly  Emperor  was  the  prize  we  sought,”  Bijaz  said. 
“How little you understand our masters, the Tleilaxu. The Guild and Bene 
Gesserit  believe  we  produce  artifacts.  In  reality,  we  produce  tools  and 
services. Anything can be a tool—poverty, war. War is useful because it is 
e?ective  in  so  many  areas.  It  stimulates  the  metabolism.  It  enforces 
government. It di?uses genetic strains. It possesses a vitality such as nothing 
else in the universe. Only those who recognize the value of war and exercise 
it have any degree of self-determination.” 
In an oddly placid voice, Hayt said: “Strange thoughts coming from you, 
almost  enough  to  make  me  believe  in  a  vengeful  Providence.  What 
restitution  was  exacted  to  create  you?  It  would  make  a  fascinating  story, 
doubtless with an even more extraordinary epilogue.” 
“Magni?cent!” Bijaz chortled. “You attack—therefore you have willpower 
and exercise self-determination.” 
“You’re trying to awaken violence in me,” Hayt said in a panting voice. 
Bijaz denied this with a shake of the head. “Awaken, yes; violence, no. 
You  are  a  disciple  of  awareness  by  training,  so  you  have  said.  I  have  an 
awareness to awaken in you, Duncan Idaho.” 
“Hayt!” 
“Duncan Idaho. Killer extraordinary. Lover of many women. Swordsman 
soldier. Atreides ?eld-hand on the ?eld of battle. Duncan Idaho.” 
“The past cannot be awakened.” 
“Cannot?” 
“It has never been done!” 
“True,  but  our  masters  defy  the  idea  that  something  cannot  be  done. 
Always, they seek the proper tool, the right application of e?ort, the services 
of the proper—” 
“You hide your real purpose! You throw up a screen of words and they 
mean nothing!” 
“There is a Duncan Idaho in you,” Bijaz said. “It will submit to emotion or 
to  dispassionate  examination,  but  submit  it  will.  This  awareness  will  rise 
through a screen of suppression and selection out of the dark past which dogs 
your footsteps. It goads you even now while it holds you back. There exists 
that being within you upon which awareness must focus and which you will 
obey.” 
“The Tleilaxu think I’m still their slave, but I—” 
“Quiet, slave!” Bijaz said in that whining voice. 
Hayt found himself frozen in silence. 
“Now we are down to bedrock,” Bijaz said. “I know you feel it. And these 
are the power-words to manipulate you … I think they will have su?cient 
leverage.” 
Hayt felt the perspiration pouring down his cheeks, the trembling of his 
chest and arms, but he was powerless to move. 
“One day,” Bijaz said, “the Emperor will come to you. He will say: ‘She is 
gone.’ The grief mask will occupy his face. He will give water to the dead, as 
they call their tears hereabouts. And you will say, using my voice: ‘Master! 
Oh, Master!’” 
Hayt’s jaw and throat ached with the locking of his muscles. He could 
only twist his head in a brief arc from side to side. 
“You will say, ‘I carry a message from Bijaz.’” The dwarf grimaced. “Poor 
Bijaz,  who  has  no  mind  …  poor  Bijaz,  a  drum  stu?ed  with  messages,  an 
essence for others to use … pound on Bijaz and he produces a noise …” 
Again, he grimaced. “You think me a hypocrite, Duncan Idaho! I am not! I 
can grieve, too. But the time has come to substitute swords for words.” 
A hiccup shook Hayt. 
Bijaz giggled, then: “Ah, thank you, Duncan, thank you. The demands of 
the body save us. As the Emperor carries the blood of the Harkonnens in his 
veins, he will do as we demand. He will turn into a spitting machine, a biter 
of words that ring with a lovely noise to our masters.” 
Hayt blinked, thinking how the dwarf appeared like an alert little animal, 
a thing of spite and rare intelligence. 
 Harkonnen blood in the Atreides? 
“You think of Beast Rabban, the vile Harkonnen, and you glare,” Bijaz 
said. “You are like the Fremen in this. When words fail, the sword is always 
at  hand,  eh?  You  think  of  the  torture  in?icted  upon  your  family  by  the 
Harkonnens. And, through his mother, your precious Paul is a Harkonnen! 
You would not ?nd it di?cult to slay a Harkonnen, now would you?” 
Bitter frustration coursed through the ghola. Was it anger? Why should 
this cause anger? 
“Ohhh,” Bijaz said, and: “Ahhhh, hah! Click-click. There is more to the 
message.  It  is  a  trade  the  Tleilaxu  o?er  your  precious  Paul  Atreides.  Our 
masters will restore his beloved. A sister to yourself—another ghola.” 
Hayt felt suddenly that he existed in a universe occupied only by his own 
heartbeats. 
“A ghola,” Bijaz said. “It will be the ?esh of his beloved. She will bear his 
children. She will love only him. We can even improve on the original if he 
so desires. Did ever a man have greater opportunity to regain what he’d lost? 
It is a bargain he will leap to strike.” 
Bijaz nodded, eyes drooping as though tiring. Then: “He will be tempted 
… and in his distraction, you will move close. In the instant, you will strike! 
Two gholas, not one! That is what our masters demand!” The dwarf cleared 
his throat, nodded once more, said: “Speak.” 
“I will not do it,” Hayt said. 
“But Duncan Idaho would,” Bijaz said. “It will be the moment of supreme 
vulnerability for this descendant of the Harkonnens. Do not forget this. You 
will suggest improvements to his beloved—perhaps a deathless heart, gentler 
emotions. You will o?er asylum as you move close to him—a planet of his 
choice somewhere beyond the Imperium. Think of it! His beloved restored. 
No more need for tears and a place of idyls to live out his years.” 
“A costly package,” Hayt said, probing. “He’ll ask the price.” 
“Tell him he must renounce his godhead and discredit the Qizarate. He 
must discredit himself, his sister.” 
“Nothing more?” Hayt asked, sneering. 
“He must relinquish his CHOAM holdings, naturally.” 
“Naturally.” 
“And if you’re not yet close enough to strike, speak of how much the 
Tleilaxu admire what he has taught them about the possibilities of religion. 
Tell him the Tleilaxu have a department of religious engineering, shaping 
religions to particular needs.” 
“How very clever,” Hayt said. 
“You think yourself free to sneer and disobey me,” Bijaz said. He cocked 
his head slyly to one side: “Don’t deny it …” 
“They made you well, little animal,” Hayt said. 
“And  you  as  well,”  the  dwarf  said.  “You  will  tell  him  to  hurry.  Flesh 
decays and her ?esh must be preserved in a cryological tank.” 
Hayt felt himself ?oundering, caught in a matrix of objects he could not 
recognize. The dwarf appeared so sure of himself! There had to be a ?aw in 
the Tleilaxu logic. In making their ghola, they’d keyed him to the voice of 
Bijaz, but … But what? Logic/matrix/object … How easy it was to mistake 
clear reasoning for correct reasoning! Was Tleilaxu logic distorted? 
Bijaz smiled, listened, as though to a hidden voice. “Now you will forget,” 
he said. “When the moment comes, you will remember. He will say: ‘She is 
gone.’ Duncan Idaho will awaken then.” 
The dwarf clapped his hands together. 
Hayt grunted, feeling that he had been interrupted in the middle of a 
thought … or perhaps in the middle of a sentence. What was it? Something 
about … targets? 
“You think to confuse me and manipulate me,” he said. 
“How is that?” Bijaz asked. 
“I am your target and you can’t deny it,” Hayt said. 
“I would not think of denying it.” 
“What is it you’d try to do with me?” 
“A kindness,” Bijaz said. “A simple kindness.” 
The sequential nature of actual events is not illuminated with lengthy precision 
by the powers of prescience except under the most extraordinary circumstances. 
The oracle grasps incidents cut out of their historic chain. Eternity moves. It 
in?icts itself upon the oracle and the supplicant alike. Let Muad’Dib’s subjects 
doubt his majesty and his oracular visions. Let them deny his powers. Let them 
never doubt Eternity 
. 
—The Dune Gospels 
Hayt watched Alia emerge from her temple and cross the plaza. Her guard 
was bunched close, ?erce expressions on their faces to mask the lines molded 
by good living and complacency. 
A heliograph of ’thopter wings ?ashed in the bright afternoon sun above 
the  temple,  part  of  the  Royal  Guard  with  Muad’Dib’s  ?st-symbol  on  its 
fuselage. 
Hayt returned his gaze to Alia. She looked out of place here in the city, he 
thought. Her proper setting was the desert—open, untrammeled space. An 
odd thing about her came back to him as he watched her approach: Alia 
appeared thoughtful only when she smiled. It was a trick of the eyes, he 
decided, recalling a cameo memory of her as she’d appeared at the reception 
for the Guild Ambassador: haughty against a background of music and brittle 
conversation  among  extravagant  gowns  and  uniforms.  And  Alia  had  been 
wearing white, dazzling, a bright garment of chastity. He had looked down 
upon her from a window as she crossed an inner garden with its formal pond, 
its ?uting fountains, fronds of pampas grass and a white belvedere. 
Entirely wrong … all wrong. She belonged in the desert. 
Hayt drew in a ragged breath. Alia moved out of his view then as she did 
now.  He  waited,  clenching  and  unclenching  his  ?sts.  The  interview  with 
Bijaz had left him uneasy. 
He heard Alia’s entourage pass outside the room where he waited. She 
went into the Family quarters. 
Now he tried to focus on the thing about her which troubled him. The 
way she’d walked across the plaza? Yes. She’d moved like a hunted creature 
?eeing some predator. He stepped out onto the connecting balcony, walked 
along  it  behind  the  plasmeld  sunscreen,  stopped  while  still  in  concealing 
shadows. Alia stood at the balustrade overlooking her temple. 
He looked where she was looking—out over the city. He saw rectangles, 
blocks of color, creeping movements of life and sound. Structures gleamed, 
shimmered. Heat patterns spiraled o? the rooftops. There was a boy across 
the way bouncing a ball in a cul-de-sac formed by a buttressed massif at a 
corner of the temple. Back and forth the ball went. 
Alia, too, watched the ball. She felt a compelling identity with that ball— 
back  and  forth  …  back  and  forth.  She  sensed  herself  bouncing  through 
corridors of Time. 
The potion of melange she’d drained just before leaving the temple was 
the largest she’d ever attempted—a massive overdose. Even before beginning 
to take e?ect, it had terri?ed her. 
Why did I do it?  she asked herself. 
One made a choice between dangers. Was that it? This was the way to 
penetrate the fog spread over the future by that damnable Dune Tarot. A 
barrier existed. It must be breached. She had acted out of a necessity to see 
where it was her brother walked with his eyeless stride. 
The familiar melange fugue state began creeping into her awareness. She 
took a deep breath, experienced a brittle form of calm, poised and sel?ess. 
Possession of second sight has a tendency to make one a dangerous fatalist , 
she thought. Unfortunately, there existed no abstract leverage, no calculus of 
prescience. Visions of the future could not be manipulated as formulas. One 
had to enter them, risking life and sanity. 
A ?gure moved from the harsh shadows of the adjoining balcony. The 
ghola! In her heightened awareness, Alia saw him with intense clarity—the 
dark,  lively  features  dominated  by  those  glistening  metal  eyes.  He  was  a 
union of terrifying opposites, something put together in a shocking, linear 
way. He was shadow and blazing light, a product of the process which had 
revived his dead ?esh … and of something intensely pure … innocent. 
He was innocence under siege! 
“Have you been there all along, Duncan?” she asked. 
“So I’m to be Duncan,” he said. “Why?” 
“Don’t question me,” she said. 
And she thought, looking at him, that the Tleilaxu had left no corner of 
their ghola un?nished. 
“Only gods can safely risk perfection,” she said. “It’s a dangerous thing for 
a man.” 
“Duncan died,” he said, wishing she would not call him that. “I am Hayt.” 
She  studied  his  arti?cial  eyes,  wondering  what  they  saw.  Observed 
closely, they betrayed tiny black pockmarks, little wells of darkness in the 
glittering metal. Facets! The universe shimmered around her and lurched. 
She  steadied  herself  with  a  hand  on  the  sun-warmed  surface  of  the 
balustrade. Ahhhh, the melange moved swiftly. 
“Are you ill?” Hayt asked. He moved closer, the steely eyes opened wide, 
staring. 
Who spoke?  she wondered. Was it Duncan Idaho? Was it the mentat-ghola 
or the Zensunni philosopher? Or was it a Tleilaxu pawn more dangerous than 
any Guild Steersman? Her brother knew. 
Again, she looked at the ghola. There was something inactive about him 
now, a latent something. He was saturated with waiting and with powers 
beyond their common life. 
“Out of my mother, I am like the Bene Gesserit,” she said. “Do you know 
that?” 
“I know it.” 
“I use their powers, think as they think. Part of me knows the sacred 
urgency of the breeding program … and its products.” 
She blinked, feeling part of her awareness begin to move freely in Time. 
“It’s said that the Bene Gesserit never let go,” he said. And he watched 
her closely, noting how white her knuckles were where she gripped the edge 
of the balcony. 
“Have I stumbled?” she asked. 
He marked how deeply she breathed, with tension in every movement, 
the glazed appearance of her eyes. 
“When you stumble,” he said, “you may regain your balance by jumping 
beyond the thing that tripped you.” 
“The Bene Gesserit stumbled,” she said. “Now they wish to regain their 
balance by leaping beyond my brother. They want Chani’s baby … or mine.” 
“Are you with child?” 
She struggled to ?x herself in a timespace relationship to this question. 
With child? When? Where? 
“I see … my child,” she whispered. 
She moved away from the balcony’s edge, turned her head to look at the 
ghola. He had a face of salt, bitter eyes—two circles of glistening lead … and, 
as he turned away from the light to follow her movement, blue shadows. 
“What … do you see with such eyes?” she whispered. 
“What other eyes see,” he said. 
His words rang in her ears, stretching her awareness. She felt that she 
reached  across  the  universe—such  a  stretching  …  out  …  out.  She  lay 
intertwined with all Time. 
“You’ve taken the spice, a large dose,” he said. 
“Why can’t I see him?” she muttered. The womb of all creation held her 
captive. “Tell me, Duncan, why I cannot see him.” 
“Who can’t you see?” 
“I cannot see the father of my children. I’m lost in a Tarot fog. Help me.” 
Mentat  logic  o?ered  its  prime  computation,  and  he  said:  “The  Bene 
Gesserit  want  a  mating  between  you  and  your  brother.  It  would  lock  the 
genetic …” 
A wail escaped her. “The egg in the ?esh,” she gasped. A sensation of 
chill  swept  over  her,  followed  by  intense  heat.  The  unseen  mate  of  her 
darkest dreams! Flesh of her ?esh that the oracle could not reveal—would it 
come to that? 
“Have you risked a dangerous dose of the spice?” he asked. Something 
within  him  fought  to  express  the  utmost  terror  at  the  thought  that  an 
Atreides woman might die, that Paul might face him with the knowledge that 
a female of the royal family had … gone. 
“You don’t know what it’s like to hunt the future,” she said. “Sometimes I 
glimpse myself … but I get in my own way. I cannot see through myself.” 
She lowered her head, shook it from side to side. 
“How much of the spice did you take?” he asked. 
“Nature abhors prescience,” she said, raising her head. “Did you know 
that, Duncan?” 
He spoke softly, reasonably, as to a small child: “Tell me how much of the 
spice you took.” He took hold of her shoulder with his left hand. 
“Words are such gross machinery, so primitive and ambiguous,” she said. 
She pulled away from his hand. 
“You must tell me,” he said. 
“Look at the Shield Wall,” she commanded, pointing. She sent her gaze 
along her own outstretched hand, trembled as the landscape crumbled in an 
overwhelming vision—a sandcastle destroyed by invisible waves. She averted 
her eyes, was trans?xed by the appearance of the ghola’s face. His features 
crawled,  became  aged,  then  young  …  aged  …  young.  He  was  life  itself, 
assertive, endless … She turned to ?ee, but he grabbed her left wrist. 
“I am going to summon a doctor,” he said. 
“No! You must let me have the vision! I have to know!” 
“You are going inside now,” he said. 
She  stared  down  at  his  hand.  Where  their  ?esh  touched,  she  felt  an 
electric presence that both lured and frightened her. She jerked free, gasped: 
“You can’t hold the whirlwind!” 
“You must have medical help!” he snapped. 
“Don’t  you  understand?”  she  demanded.  “My  vision’s  incomplete,  just 
fragments. It ?ickers and jumps. I have to remember the future. Can’t you see 
that?” 
“What  is  the  future  if  you  die?”  he  asked,  forcing  her  gently  into  the 
Family chambers. 
“Words  …  words,”  she  muttered.  “I  can’t  explain  it.  One  thing  is  the 
occasion of another thing, but there’s no cause … no e?ect. We can’t leave 
the universe as it was. Try as we may, there’s a gap.” 
“Stretch out here,” he commanded. 
He is so dense!  she thought. 
Cool  shadows  enveloped  her.  She  felt  her  own  muscles  crawling  like 
worms—a  ?rm  bed  that  she  knew  to  be  insubstantial.  Only  space  was 
permanent. Nothing else had substance. The bed ?owed with many bodies, 
all  of  them  her  own.  Time  became  a  multiple  sensation,  overloaded.  It 
presented no single reaction for her to abstract. It was Time. It moved. The 
whole universe slipped backward, forward, sideways. 
“It has no thing-aspect,” she explained. “You can’t get under it or around 
it. There’s no place to get leverage.” 
There came a ?uttering of people all around her. Many someones held her 
left hand. She looked at her own moving ?esh, followed a twining arm out to 
a  ?uid  mask  of  face:  Duncan  Idaho!  His  eyes  were  …  wrong,  but  it  was 
Duncan—child-man-adolescent-child-man-adolescent  …  Every  line  of  his 
features betrayed concern for her. 
“Duncan, don’t be afraid,” she whispered. 
He squeezed her hand, nodded. “Be still,” he said. 
And he thought:  She must not die! She must not! No Atreides woman can die! 
He shook his head sharply. Such thoughts de?ed mentat logic. Death was a 
necessity that life might continue. 
The ghola loves me , Alia thought. 
The thought became bedrock to which she might cling. He was a familiar 
face with a solid room behind him. She recognized one of the bedrooms in 
Paul’s suite. 
A ?xed, immutable person did something with a tube in her throat. She 
fought against retching. 
“We got her in time,” a voice said, and she recognized the tones of a 
Family medic. “You should’ve called me sooner.” There was suspicion in the 
medic’s  voice.  She  felt  the  tube  slide  out  of  her  throat—a  snake,  a 
shimmering cord. 
“The slapshot will make her sleep,” the medic said. “I’ll send one of her 
attendants to—” 
“I will stay with her,” the ghola said. 
“That is not seemly!” the medic snapped. 
“Stay … Duncan,” Alia whispered. 
He stroked her hand to tell her he’d heard. “M’Lady,” the medic said, “it’d 
be better if …” 
“You do not tell me what is best,” she rasped. Her throat ached with each 
syllable. 
“M’Lady,”  the  medic  said,  voice  accusing,   “you   know  the  dangers  of 
consuming too much melange. I can only assume someone gave it to you 
without—” 
“You are a fool,” she rasped. “Would you deny me my visions? I knew 
what I took and why.” She put a hand to her throat. “Leave us. At once!” 
The medic pulled out of her ?eld of vision, said: “I will send word to your 
brother.” 
She  felt  him  leave,  turned  her  attention  to  the  ghola.  The  vision  lay 
clearly in her awareness now, a culture medium in which the present grew 
outward. She sensed the ghola move in that play of Time, no longer cryptic, 
?xed now against a recognizable background. 
He is the crucible , she thought.  He is danger and salvation . 
And she shuddered, knowing she saw the vision her brother had seen. 
Unwanted tears burned her eyes. She shook her head sharply. No tears! They 
wasted moisture and, worse, distracted the harsh ?ow of vision. Paul must be 
stopped! Once, just once, she had bridged Time to place her voice where he 
would pass. But stress and mutability would not permit that here. The web of 
Time passed through her brother now like rays of light through a lens. He 
stood at the focus and he knew it. He had gathered all the lines to himself 
and would not permit them to escape or change. 
“Why?”  she  muttered.  “Is  it  hate?  Does  he  strike  out  at  Time  itself 
because it hurt him? Is that it … hate?” 
Thinking he heard her speak his name, the ghola said: “M’Lady?” 
“If I could only burn this thing out of me!” she cried. “I didn’t want to be 
di?erent.” 
“Please, Alia,” he murmured. “Let yourself sleep.” 
“I  wanted  to  be  able  to  laugh,”  she  whispered.  Tears  slid  down  her 
cheeks. “But I’m sister to an Emperor who’s worshiped as a god. People fear 
me. I never wanted to be feared.” 
He wiped the tears from her face. 
“I don’t want to be part of history,” she whispered. “I just want to be 
loved … and to love.” 
“You are loved,” he said. 
“Ahhh, loyal, loyal Duncan,” she said. 
“Please, don’t call me that,” he pleaded. 
“But you are,” she said. “And loyalty is a valued commodity. It can be 
sold … not bought, but sold.” 
“I don’t like your cynicism,” he said. 
“Damn your logic! It’s true!” 
“Sleep,” he said. 
“Do you love me, Duncan?” she asked. 
“Yes.” 
“Is that one of those lies,” she asked, “one of the lies that are easier to 
believe than the truth? Why am I afraid to believe you?” 
“You fear my di?erences as you fear your own.” 
“Be a man, not a mentat!” she snarled. 
“I am a mentat and a man.” 
“Will you make me your woman, then?” 
“I will do what love demands.” 
“And loyalty?” 
“And loyalty.” 
“That’s where you’re dangerous,” she said. 
Her words disturbed him. No sign of the disturbance arose to his face, no 
muscle trembled—but she knew it. Vision-memory exposed the disturbance. 
She felt she had missed part of the vision, though, that she should remember 
something else from the future. There existed another perception which did 
not go precisely by the senses, a thing which fell into her head from nowhere 
the way prescience did. It lay in the Time shadows—in?nitely painful. 
Emotion!  That  was  it—emotion!  It  had  appeared  in  the  vision,  not 
directly, but as a product from which she could infer what lay behind. She 
had been possessed by emotion—a single constriction made up of fear, grief 
and love. They lay there in the vision, all collected into a single epidemic 
body, overpowering and primordial. 
“Duncan, don’t let me go,” she whispered. 
“Sleep,” he said. “Don’t ?ght it.” 
“I must … I must. He’s the bait in his own trap. He’s the servant of power 
and terror. Violence … dei?cation is a prison enclosing him. He’ll lose … 
everything. It’ll tear him apart.” 
“You speak of Paul?” 
“They drive him to destroy himself,” she gasped, arching her back. “Too 
much weight, too much grief. They seduce him away from love.” She sank 
back to the bed. “They’re creating a universe where he won’t permit himself 
to live.” 
“Who is doing this?” 
“He is! Ohhh, you’re so dense. He’s part of the pattern. And it’s too late … 
too late … too late …” 
As she spoke, she felt her awareness descend, layer by layer. It came to 
rest directly behind her navel. Body and mind separated and merged in a 
storehouse of relic visions—moving, moving … She heard a fetal heartbeat, a 
child of the future. The melange still possessed her, then, setting her adrift in 
Time. She knew she had tasted the life of a child not yet conceived. One 
thing certain about this child—it would su?er the same awakening she had 
su?ered. It would be an aware, thinking entity before birth. 
There  exists  a  limit  to  the  force  even  the  most  powerful  may  apply  without 
destroying  themselves.  Judging  this  limit  is  the  true  artistry  of  government. 
Misuse of power is the fatal sin. The law cannot be a tool of vengeance, never a 
hostage,  nor  a  forti?cation  against  the  martyrs  it  has  created.  You  cannot 
threaten any individual and escape the consequences 
. 
—Muad’Dib on Law The Stilgar Commentary 
Chani stared out at the morning desert framed in the fault cleft below Sietch 
Tabr. She wore no stillsuit, and this made her feel unprotected here in the 
desert. The sietch grotto’s entrance lay hidden in the buttressed cli? above 
and behind her. 
The  desert  …  the  desert  …  She  felt  that  the  desert  had  followed  her 
wherever  she  had  gone.  Coming  back  to  the  desert  was  not  so  much  a 
homecoming as a turning around to see what had always been there. 
A painful constriction surged through her abdomen. The birth would be 
soon. She fought down the pain, wanting this moment alone with her desert. 
Dawn  stillness  gripped  the  land.  Shadows  ?ed  among  the  dunes  and 
terraces of the Shield Wall all around. Daylight lunged over the high scarp 
and plunged her up to her eyes in a bleak landscape stretching beneath a 
washed blue sky. The scene matched the feeling of dreadful cynicism which 
had tormented her since the moment she’d learned of Paul’s blindness. 
Why are we here?  she wondered. 
It was not a hajra, a journey of seeking. Paul sought nothing here except, 
perhaps, a place for her to give birth. He had summoned odd companions for 
this journey, she thought—Bijaz, the Tleilaxu dwarf; the ghola, Hayt, who 
might be Duncan Idaho’s revenant; Edric, the Guild Steersman-Ambassador; 
Gauis Helen Mohiam, the Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother he so obviously 
hated;  Lichna,  Otheym’s  strange  daughter,  who  seemed  unable  to  move 
beyond the watchful eyes of guards; Stilgar, her uncle of the Naibs, and his 
favorite wife, Harah … and Irulan … Alia … 
The  sound  of  wind  through  the  rocks  accompanied  her  thoughts.  The 
desert day had become yellow on yellow, tan on tan, gray on gray. 
Why such a strange mixture of companions? 
“We have forgotten,” Paul had said in response to her question, “that the 
word ‘company’ originally meant traveling companions. We are a company.” 
“But what value are they?” 
“There!” he’d said, turning his frightful sockets toward her. “We’ve lost 
that clear, single-note of living. If it cannot be bottled, beaten, pointed or 
hoarded, we give it no value.” 
Hurt, she’d said: “That’s not what I meant.” 
“Ahhh, dearest one,” he’d said, soothing, “we are so money-rich and so 
life-poor. I am evil, obstinate, stupid …” 
“You are not!” 
“That, too, is true. But my hands are blue with time. I think … I think I 
tried to invent life, not realizing it’d already been invented.” 
And he’d touched her abdomen to feel the new life there. 
Remembering, she placed both hands over her abdomen and trembled, 
sorry that she’d asked Paul to bring her here. 
The desert wind had stirred up evil odors from the fringe plantings which 
anchored the dunes at the cli? base. Fremen superstition gripped her: 
 evil 
odors, evil times 
. She faced into the wind, saw a worm appear outside the 
plantings. It arose like the prow of a demon ship out of the dunes, threshed 
sand,  smelled  the  water  deadly  to  its  kind,  and  ?ed  beneath  a  long, 
burrowing mound. 
She hated the water then, inspired by the worm’s fear. Water, once the 
spirit-soul of Arrakis, had become a poison. Water brought pestilence. Only 
the desert was clean. 
Below her, a Fremen work gang appeared. They climbed to the sietch’s 
middle entrance, and she saw that they had muddy feet. 
Fremen with muddy feet! 
The children of the sietch began singing to the morning above her, their 
voices piping from the upper entrance. The voices made her feel time ?eeing 
from her like hawks before the wind. She shuddered. 
What storms did Paul  see  with his eyeless vision? 
She  sensed  a  vicious  madman  in  him,  someone  weary  of  songs  and 
polemics. 
The sky, she noted, had become crystal gray ?lled with alabaster rays, 
bizarre  designs  etched  across  the  heavens  by  windborne  sand.  A  line  of 
gleaming white in the south caught her attention. Eyes suddenly alerted, she 
interpreted the sign: White sky in the south: Shai-hulud’s mouth. A storm 
came,  big  wind.  She  felt  the  warning  breeze,  a  crystal  blowing  of  sand 
against her cheeks. The incense of death came on the wind: odors of water 
?owing in qanats, sweating sand, ?int. The water—that was why Shai-hulud 
sent his coriolis wind. 
Hawks  appeared  in  the  cleft  where  she  stood,  seeking  safety  from  the 
wind. They were brown as the rocks and with scarlet in their wings. She felt 
her spirit go out to them: they had a place to hide; she had none. 
“M’Lady, the wind comes!” 
She turned, saw the ghola calling to her outside the upper entrance to the 
sietch. Fremen fears gripped her. Clean death and the body’s water claimed 
for  the  tribe,  these  she  understood.  But  …  something  brought  back  from 
death … 
Windblown sand whipped at her, reddened her cheeks. She glanced over 
her shoulder at the frightful band of dust across the sky. The desert beneath 
the storm had taken on a tawny, restless appearance as though dune waves 
beat  on  a  tempest  shore  the  way  Paul  had  once  described  a  sea.  She 
hesitated, caught by a feeling of the desert’s transience. Measured against 
eternity, this was no more than a caldron. Dune surf thundered against cli?s. 
The  storm  out  there  had  become  a  universal  thing  for  her—all  the 
animals  hiding  from  it  …  nothing  left  of  the  desert  but  its  own  private 
sounds: blown sand scraping along rock, a wind-surge whistling, the gallop of 
a boulder tumbled suddenly from its hill—then! somewhere out of sight, a 
capsized worm thumping its idiot way aright and slithering o? to its dry 
depths. 
It was only a moment as her life measured time, but in that moment she 
felt this planet being swept away—cosmic dust, part of other waves. 
“We must hurry,” the ghola said from right beside her. 
She sensed fear in him then, concern for her safety. 
“It’ll shred the ?esh from your bones,” he said, as though he needed to 
explain such a storm to 
 her . 
Her fear of him dispelled by his obvious concern, Chani allowed the ghola 
to help her up the rock stairway to the sietch. They entered the twisting 
ba?e which protected the entrance. Attendants opened the moisture seals, 
closed them behind. 
Sietch  odors  assaulted  her  nostrils.  The  place  was  a  ferment  of  nasal 
memories—the  warren  closeness  of  bodies,  rank  esters  of  the  reclamation 
stills, familiar food aromas, the ?inty burning of machines at work … and 
through it all, the omnipresent spice; melange everywhere. 
She took a deep breath. “Home.” 
The ghola took his hand from her arm, stood aside, a patient ?gure now, 
almost as though turned o? when not in use. Yet … he watched. 
Chani hesitated in the entrance chamber, puzzled by something she could 
not name. This was truly her home. As a child, she’d hunted scorpions here 
by glowglobe light. Something was changed, though … 
“Shouldn’t you be going to your quarters, m’Lady?” the ghola asked. 
As though ignited by his words, a rippling birth constriction seized her 
abdomen. She fought against revealing it. 
“M’Lady?” the ghola said. 
“Why is Paul afraid for me to bear our children?” she asked. 
“It is a natural thing to fear for your safety,” the ghola said. 
She put a hand to her cheek where the sand had reddened it. “And he 
doesn’t fear for the children?” 
“M’Lady,  he  cannot  think  of  a  child  without  remembering  that  your 
?rstborn was slain by the Sardaukar.” 
She  studied  the  ghola—?at  face,  unreadable  mechanical  eyes.  Was  he 
truly Duncan Idaho, this creature? Was he friend to anyone? Had he spoken 
truthfully now? 
“You should be with the medics,” the ghola said. 
Again, she heard the fear for her safety in his voice. She felt abruptly that 
her mind lay undefended, ready to be invaded by shocking perceptions. 
“Hayt, I’m afraid,” she whispered. “Where is my Usul?” 
“A?airs of state detain him,” the ghola said. 
She  nodded,  thinking  of  the  government  apparatus  which  had 
accompanied them in a great ?ight of ornithopters. Abruptly, she realized 
what puzzled her about the sietch: outworld odors. The clerks and aides had 
brought  their  own  perfumes  into  this  environment,  aromas  of  diet  and 
clothing, of exotic toiletries. They were an undercurrent of odors here. 
Chani  shook  herself,  concealing  an  urge  to  bitter  laughter.  Even  the 
smells changed in Muad’Dib’s presence! 
“There were pressing matters which he could not defer,” the ghola said, 
misreading her hesitation. 
“Yes … yes, I understand. I came with that swarm, too.” 
Recalling the ?ight from Arrakeen, she admitted to herself now that she 
had not expected to survive it. Paul had insisted on piloting his own ’thopter. 
Eyeless, he had guided the machine here. After that experience, she knew 
nothing he did could surprise her. 
Another pain fanned out through her abdomen. 
The ghola saw her indrawn breath, the tightening of her cheeks, said: “Is 
it your time?” 
“I … yes, it is.” 
“You must not delay,” he said. He grasped her arm, hurried her down the 
hall. 
She sensed panic in him, said: “There’s time.” 
He seemed not to hear. “The Zensunni approach to birth,” he said, urging 
her even faster, “is to wait without purpose in the state of highest tension. Do 
not compete with what is happening. To compete is to prepare for failure. Do 
not  be  trapped  by  the  need  to  achieve  anything.  This  way,  you  achieve 
everything.” 
While he spoke, they reached the entrance to her quarters. He thrust her 
through the hangings, cried out: “Harah! Harah! It is Chani’s time. Summon 
the medics!” 
His call brought attendants running. There was a great bustling of people 
in which Chani felt herself an isolated island of calm … until the next pain 
came. 
Hayt, dismissed to the outer passage, took time to wonder at his own 
actions.  He  felt  ?xated  at  some  point  of  time  where  all  truths  were  only 
temporary. Panic lay beneath his actions, he realized. Panic centered not on 
the  possibility  that  Chani  might  die,  but  that  Paul  should  come  to  him 
afterward … ?lled with grief … his loved one … gone … gone … 
Something cannot emerge from nothing , the ghola told himself.  From what 
does this panic emerge? 
He  felt  that  his  mentat  faculties  had  been  dulled,  let  out  a  long, 
shuddering  breath.  A  psychic  shadow  passed  over  him.  In  the  emotional 
darkness of it, he felt himself waiting for some absolute sound—the snap of a 
branch in a jungle. 
A sigh shook him. Danger had passed without striking. 
Slowly, marshaling his powers, shedding bits of inhibition, he sank into 
mentat awareness. He forced it—not the best way—but somehow necessary. 
Ghost shadows moved within him in place of people. He was a trans-shipping 
station for every datum he had ever encountered. His being was inhabited by 
creatures of possibility. They passed in revue to be compared, judged. 
Perspiration broke out on his forehead. 
Thoughts  with  fuzzy  edges  feathered  away  into  darkness—unknown. 
In?nite systems! A mentat could not function without realizing he worked in 
in?nite systems. Fixed knowledge could not surround the in?nite.  Everywhere 
could  not  be  brought  into  ?nite  perspective.  Instead,  he  must   become   the 
in?nite—momentarily. 
In one gestalten spasm, he had it, seeing Bijaz seated before him blazing 
from some inner ?re. 
Bijaz! 
The dwarf had done something to him! 
Hayt felt himself teetering on the lip of a deadly pit. He projected the 
mentat computation line forward, seeing what could develop out of his own 
actions. 
“A compulsion!” he gasped. “I’ve been rigged with a compulsion!” 
A  blue-robed  courier,  passing  as  Hayt  spoke,  hesitated.  “Did  you  say 
something, sirra?” 
Not looking at him, the ghola nodded. “I said everything.” 
There was a man so wise , 
He jumped into 
A sandy place 
And burnt out both his eyes! 
And when he knew his eyes were gone , 
He o?ered no complaint . 
He summoned up a vision 
And made himself a saint . 
—Children’s Verse from History of Muad’Dib 
Paul stood in darkness outside the sietch. Oracular vision told him it was 
night, that moonlight silhouetted the shrine atop Chin Rock high on his left. 
This was a memory-saturated place, his ?rst sietch, where he and Chani … 
I must not think of Chani , he told himself. 
The thinning cup of his vision told him of changes all around—a cluster 
of palms far down to the right, the black-silver line of a qanat carrying water 
through dunes piled up by that morning’s storm. 
Water ?owing in the desert!  He recalled another kind of water ?owing in a 
river of his birthworld, Caladan. He hadn’t realized then the treasure of such 
a ?ow, even the murky slithering in a qanat across a desert basin. Treasure. 
With a delicate cough, an aide came up behind. 
Paul held out his hands for a magnaboard with a single sheet of metallic 
paper on it. He moved as sluggishly as the qanat’s water. The vision ?owed, 
but he found himself increasingly reluctant to move with it. 
“Pardon, Sire,” the aide said. “The Semboule Treaty—your signature?” 
“I can read it!” Paul snapped. He scrawled “Atreides Imper.” in the proper 
place, returned the board, thrusting it directly into the aide’s outstretched 
hand, aware of the fear this inspired. 
The man ?ed. 
Paul  turned  away.   Ugly,  barren  land!   He  imagined  it  sun-soaked  and 
monstrous with heat, a place of sandslides and the drowned darkness of dust 
pools, blowdevils unreeling tiny dunes across the rocks, their narrow bellies 
full of ochre crystals. But it was a rich land, too: big, exploding out of narrow 
places  with  vistas  of  storm-trodden  emptiness,  rampart  cli?s  and 
tumbledown ridges. 
All it required was water … and love. 
Life changed those irascible wastes into shapes of grace and movement, 
he thought. That was the message of the desert. Contrast stunned him with 
realization. He wanted to turn to the aides massed in the sietch entrance, 
shout at them: If you need something to worship, then worship life—all life, 
every last crawling bit of it! We’re all in this beauty together! 
They  wouldn’t  understand.  In  the  desert,  they  were  endlessly  desert. 
Growing things performed no green ballet for them. 
He clenched his ?sts at his sides, trying to halt the vision. He wanted to 
?ee from his own mind. It was a beast come to devour him! Awareness lay in 
him, sodden, heavy with all the living it had sponged up, saturated with too 
many experiences. 
Desperately, Paul squeezed his thoughts outward. 
Stars! 
Awareness turned over at the thought of all those stars above him—an 
in?nite volume. A man must be half mad to imagine he could rule even a 
teardrop of that volume. He couldn’t begin to imagine the number of subjects 
his Imperium claimed. 
Subjects? Worshipers and enemies, more likely. Did any among them see 
beyond rigid beliefs? Where was one man who’d escaped the narrow destiny 
of his prejudices? Not even an Emperor escaped. He’d lived a take-everything 
life, tried to create a universe in his own image. But the exultant universe 
was breaking across him at last with its silent waves. 
I spit on Dune!  he thought.  I give it my moisture! 
This myth he’d made out of intricate movements and imagination, out of 
moonlight  and  love,  out  of  prayers  older  than  Adam,  and  gray  cli?s  and 
crimson  shadows,  laments  and  rivers  of  martyrs—what  had  it  come  to  at 
last? When the waves receded, the shores of Time would spread out there 
clean, empty, shining with in?nite grains of memory and little else. Was this 
the golden genesis of man? 
Sand scu?ed against rocks told him that the ghola had joined him. 
“You’ve been avoiding me today, Duncan,” Paul said. 
“It’s dangerous for you to call me that,” the ghola said. 
“I know.” 
“I … came to warn you, m’Lord.” 
“I know.” 
The story of the compulsion Bijaz had put on him poured from the ghola 
then. 
“Do you know the nature of the compulsion?” Paul asked. 
“Violence.” 
Paul  felt  himself  arriving  at  a  place  which  had  claimed  him  from  the 
beginning. He stood suspended. The Jihad had seized him, ?xed him onto a 
glidepath from which the terrible gravity of the Future would never release 
him. 
“There’ll be no violence from Duncan,” Paul whispered. 
“But, Sire …” 
“Tell me what you see around us,” Paul said. 
“M’Lord?” 
“The desert—how is it tonight?” 
“Don’t you  see  it?” 
“I have no eyes, Duncan.” 
“But …” 
“I’ve only my vision,” Paul said, “and wish I didn’t have it. I’m dying of 
prescience, did you know that, Duncan?” 
“Perhaps … what you fear won’t happen,” the ghola said. 
“What?  Deny  my  own  oracle?  How  can  I  when  I’ve  seen  it  ful?lled 
thousands of times? People call it a power, a gift. It’s an a?iction! It won’t 
let me leave my life where I found it!” 
“M’Lord,” the ghola muttered, “I… it isn’t … young master, you don’t … I 
…” He fell silent. 
Paul sensed the ghola’s confusion, said: “What’d you call me, Duncan?” 
“What? What? I … for a moment, I …” 
“You called me ‘young master.’” 
“I did, yes.” 
“That’s what Duncan always called me.” Paul reached out, touched the 
ghola’s face. “Was that part of your Tleilaxu training?” 
“No.” 
Paul lowered his hand. “What, then?” 
“It came from … me.” 
“Do you serve two masters?” 
“Perhaps.” 
“Free yourself from the ghola, Duncan.” 
“How?” 
“You’re human. Do a human thing.” 
“I’m a ghola!” 
“But your ?esh is human. Duncan’s in there.” 
“ Something’s  in there.” 
“I care not how you do it,” Paul said, “but you’ll do it.” 
“You’ve foreknowledge?” 
“Foreknowledge  be  damned!”  Paul  turned  away.  His  vision  hurtled 
forward now, gaps in it, but it wasn’t a thing to be stopped. 
“M’Lord, if you’ve—” 
“Quiet!” Paul held up a hand. “Did you hear that?” 
“Hear what, m’Lord?” 
Paul shook his head. Duncan hadn’t heard it. Had he only imagined the 
sound? It’d been his tribal name called from the desert—far away and low: 
“Usul … Uuuussssuuuullll …” 
“What is it, m’Lord?” 
Paul shook his head. He felt watched. Something out there in the night 
shadows knew he was here. Something? No—some 
one . 
“It was mostly sweet,” he whispered, “and you were the sweetest of all.” 
“What’d you say, m’Lord?” 
“It’s the future,” Paul said. 
That  amorphous  human  universe  out  there  had  undergone  a  spurt  of 
motion, dancing to the tune of his vision. It had struck a powerful note then. 
The ghost-echoes might endure. 
“I don’t understand, m’Lord,” the ghola said. 
“A Fremen dies when he’s too long from the desert,” Paul said. “They call 
it the ‘water sickness.’ Isn’t that odd?” 
“That’s very odd.” 
Paul strained at memories, tried to recall the sound of Chani breathing 
beside him in the night. 
 Where is there comfort?  he wondered. All he could 
remember was Chani at breakfast the day they’d left for the desert. She’d 
been restless, irritable. 
“Why do you wear that old jacket?” she’d demanded, eyeing the black 
uniform coat with its red hawk crest beneath his Fremen robes. “You’re an 
Emperor!” 
“Even an Emperor has his favorite clothing,” he’d said. 
For no reason he could explain, this had brought real tears to Chani’s eyes 
—the second time in her life when Fremen inhibitions had been shattered. 
Now, in the darkness, Paul rubbed his own cheeks, felt moisture there. 
Who gives moisture to the dead?  he wondered. It was his own face, yet not his. 
The wind chilled the wet skin. A frail dream formed, broke. What was this 
swelling in his breast? Was it something he’d eaten? How bitter and plaintive 
was this other self, giving moisture to the dead. The wind bristled with sand. 
The  skin,  dry  now,  was  his  own.  But  whose  was  the  quivering  which 
remained? 
They heard the wailing then, far away in the sietch depths. It grew louder 
… louder … 
The ghola whirled at a sudden glare of light, someone ?inging wide the 
entrance seals. In the light, he saw a man with a ra?sh grin—no! Not a grin, 
but a grimace of grief! It was a Fedaykin lieutenant named Tandis. Behind 
him  came  a  press  of  many  people,  all  fallen  silent  now  that  they  saw 
Muad’Dib. 
“Chani …” Tandis said. 
“Is dead,” Paul whispered. “I heard her call.” 
He turned toward the sietch. He knew this place. It was a place where he 
could not hide. His onrushing vision illuminated the entire Fremen mob. He 
saw  Tandis, felt the Fedaykin’s grief, the fear and anger. 
“She is gone,” Paul said. 
The  ghola  heard  the  words  out  of  a  blazing  corona.  They  burned  his 
chest,  his  backbone,  the  sockets  of  his  metal  eyes.  He  felt  his  right  hand 
move  toward  the  knife  at  his  belt.  His  own  thinking  became  strange, 
disjointed. He was a puppet held fast by strings reaching down from that 
awful corona. He moved to another’s commands, to another’s desires. The 
strings jerked his arms, his legs, his jaw. Sounds came squeezing out of his 
mouth, a terrifying repetitive noise— 
“Hraak! Hraak! Hraak!” 
The knife came up to strike. In that instant, he grabbed his own voice, 
shaped rasping words: “Run! Young master, run!” 
“We will not run,” Paul said. “We’ll move with dignity. We’ll do what 
must be done.” 
The ghola’s muscles locked. He shuddered, swayed. 
“… what must be done!”  The words rolled in his mind like a great ?sh 
surfacing. “… 
 what must be done! ” Ahhh, that had sounded like the old Duke, 
Paul’s grandfather. The young master had some of the old man in him. 
 “… 
what must be done!” 
The words began to unfold in the ghola’s consciousness. A sensation of 
living  two  lives  simultaneously  spread  out  through  his  awareness:  Hayt/ 
Idaho/Hayt/Idaho  …  He  became  a  motionless  chain  of  relative  existence, 
singular, alone. Old memories ?ooded his mind. He marked them, adjusted 
them to new understandings, made a beginning at the integration of a new 
awareness. A new 
 persona  achieved a temporary form of internal tyranny. 
The  masculating  synthesis  remained  charged  with  potential  disorder,  but 
events pressed him to the temporary adjustment. The young master needed 
him. 
It  was  done  then.  He  knew  himself  as  Duncan  Idaho,  remembering 
everything of Hayt as though it had been stored secretly in him and ignited 
by  a  ?aming  catalyst.  The  corona  dissolved.  He  shed  the  Tleilaxu 
compusions. 
“Stay close to me, Duncan,” Paul said. “I’ll need to depend on you for 
many things.” And, as Idaho continued to stand entranced: “Duncan!” 
“Yes, I am Duncan.” 
“Of course you are! This was the moment when you came back. We’ll go 
inside now.” 
Idaho fell into step beside Paul. It was like the old times, yet not like 
them. Now that he stood free of the Tleilaxu, he could appreciate what they 
had given him. Zensunni training permitted him to overcome the shock of 
events. The mentat accomplishment formed a counterbalance. He put o? all 
fear,  standing  above  the  source.  His  entire  consciousness  looked  outward 
from a position of in?nite wonder: he had been dead; he was alive. 
“Sire,” the Fedaykin Tandis said as they approached him, “the woman, 
Lichna, says she must see you. I told her to wait.” 
“Thank you,” Paul said. “The birth …” 
“I spoke to the medics,” Tandis said, falling into step. “They said you 
have two children, both of them alive and sound.” 
“Two?” Paul stumbled, caught himself on Idaho’s arm. 
“A  boy  and  a  girl,”  Tandis  said.  “I  saw  them.  They’re  good  Fremen 
babies.” 
“How … how did she die?” Paul whispered. 
“M’Lord?” Tandis bent close. 
“Chani?” Paul said. 
“It  was  the  birth,  m’Lord,”  Tandis  husked.  “They  said  her  body  was 
drained by the speed of it. I don’t understand, but that is what they said.” 
“Take me to her,” Paul whispered. 
“M’Lord?” 
“Take me to her!” 
“That’s  where  we’re  going,  m’Lord.”  Again,  Tandis  bent  close  to  Paul. 
“Why does your ghola carry a bared knife?” 
“Duncan, put away your knife,” Paul said. “The time for violence is past.” 
As  he  spoke,  Paul  felt  closer  to  the  sound  of  his  voice  than  to  the 
mechanism  which  had  created  the  sound.  Two  babies!  The  vision  had 
contained but one. Yet, these moments went as the vision went. There was a 
person here who felt grief and anger. Someone. His own awareness lay in the 
grip of an awful treadmill, replaying his life from memory. 
Two babies? 
Again  he  stumbled.   Chani,  Chani ,  he  thought.   There  was  no  other  way. 
Chani, beloved, believe me that this death was quicker for you … and kinder. 
They’d have held our children hostage, displayed you in a cage and slave pits, 
reviled you with the blame for my death. This way … this way we destroy them 
and save our children 
. 
Children? 
Once more, he stumbled. 
I permitted this , he thought.  I should feel guilty . 
The sound of noisy confusion ?lled the cavern ahead of them. It grew 
louder  precisely  as  he  remembered  it  growing  louder.  Yes,  this  was  the 
pattern, the inexorable pattern, even with two children. 
Chani is dead , he told himself. 
At some faraway instant in a past which he had shared with others, this 
future had reached down to him. It had chivvied him and herded him into a 
chasm whose walls grew narrower and narrower. He could feel them closing 
in on him. This was the way the vision went. 
Chani is dead. I should abandon myself to grief . 
But that was  not  the way the vision went. 
“Has Alia been summoned?” he asked. 
“She is with Chani’s friends,” Tandis said. 
Paul  sensed  the  mob  pressing  back  to  give  him  passage.  Their  silence 
moved ahead of him like a wave. The noisy confusion began dying down. A 
sense of congested emotion ?lled the sietch. He wanted to remove the people 
from his vision, found it impossible. Every face turning to follow him carried 
its special imprint. They were pitiless with curiosity, those faces. They felt 
grief, yes, but he understood the cruelty which drenched them. They were 
watching the articulate become dumb, the wise become a fool. Didn’t the 
clown always appeal to cruelty? 
This was more than a deathwatch, less than a wake. 
Paul felt his soul begging for respite, but still the vision moved him.  Just a 
little  farther  now 
,  he  told  himself.  Black,  visionless  dark  awaited  him  just 
ahead. There lay the place ripped out of the vision by grief and guilt, the 
place where the moon fell. 
He stumbled into it, would’ve fallen had Idaho not taken his arm in a 
?erce grip, a solid presence knowing how to share his grief in silence. 
“Here is the place,” Tandis said. 
“Watch your step, Sire,” Idaho said, helping him over an entrance lip. 
Hangings brushed Paul’s face. Idaho pulled him to a halt. Paul felt the room 
then, a re?ection against his cheeks and ears. It was a rock-walled space with 
the rock hidden behind tapestries. 
“Where is Chani?” Paul whispered. 
Harah’s voice answered him: “She is right here, Usul.” 
Paul heaved a trembling sigh. He had feared her body already had been 
removed to the stills where Fremen reclaimed the water of the tribe. Was 
that the way the vision went? He felt abandoned in his blindness. 
“The children?” Paul asked. 
“They are here, too, m’Lord,” Idaho said. 
“You have beautiful twins, Usul,” Harah said, “a boy and a girl. See? We 
have them here in a creche.” 
Two children , Paul thought wonderingly. The vision had contained only a 
daughter. He cast himself adrift from Idaho’s arm, moved toward the place 
where Harah had spoken, stumbled into a hard surface. His hands explored 
it: the metaglass outlines of a creche. 
Someone took his left arm. “Usul?” It was Harah. She guided his hand 
into the creche. He felt soft-soft ?esh. It was so warm! He felt ribs, breathing. 
“That is your son,” Harah whispered. She moved his hand. “And this is 
your daughter.” Her hand tightened on his. “Usul, are you truly blind now?” 
He knew what she was thinking.  The blind must be abandoned in the desert . 
Fremen tribes carried no dead weight. 
“Take me to Chani,” Paul said, ignoring her question. 
Harah turned him, guided him to the left. 
Paul felt himself accepting now the fact that Chani was dead. He had 
taken his place in a universe he did not want, wearing ?esh that did not ?t. 
Every breath he drew bruised his emotions. 
 Two children!  He wondered if he 
had committed himself to a passage where his vision would never return. It 
seemed unimportant. 
“Where is my brother?” 
It  was  Alia’s  voice  behind  him.  He  heard  the  rush  of  her,  the 
overwhelming presence as she took his arm from Harah. 
“I must speak to you!” Alia hissed. 
“In a moment,” Paul said. 
“Now! It’s about Lichna.” 
“I know,” Paul said. “In a moment.” 
“You don’t have a moment!” 
“I have many moments.” 
“But Chani doesn’t!” 
“Be still!” he ordered. “Chani is dead.” He put a hand across her mouth as 
she  started  to  protest.  “I  order  you  to  be  still!”  He  felt  her  subside  and 
removed his hand. “Describe what you see,” he said. 
“Paul!” Frustration and tears battled in her voice. 
“Never mind,” he said. And he forced himself to inner stillness, opened 
the eyes of his vision to this moment. Yes—it was still here. Chani’s body lay 
on a pallet within a ring of light. Someone had straightened her white robe, 
smoothed it trying to hide the blood from the birth. No matter; he could not 
turn his awareness from the vision of her face: such a mirror of eternity in 
the still features! 
He turned away, but the vision moved with him. She was gone … never 
to return. The air, the universe, all vacant—everywhere vacant. Was this the 
essence of his penance? he wondered. He wanted tears, but they would not 
come. Had he lived too long a Fremen? This death demanded its moisture! 
Nearby, a baby cried and was hushed. The sound pulled a curtain on his 
vision. Paul welcomed the darkness. 
 This is another world , he thought.  Two 
children 
. 
The thought came out of some lost oracular trance. He tried to recapture 
the timeless mind-dilation of the melange, but awareness fell short. No burst 
of the future came into this new consciousness. He felt himself rejecting the 
future—any future. 
“Goodbye, my Sihara,” he whispered. 
Alia’s voice, harsh and demanding, came from somewhere behind him. 
“I’ve brought Lichna!” 
Paul turned. “That’s not Lichna,” he said. “That’s a Face Dancer. Lichna’s 
dead.” 
“But hear what she says,” Alia said. 
Slowly, Paul moved toward his sister’s voice. 
“I’m  not  surprised  to  ?nd  you  alive,  Atreides.”  The  voice  was  like 
Lichna’s,  but  with  subtle  di?erences,  as  though  the  speaker  used  Lichna’s 
vocal cords, but no longer bothered to control them su?ciently. Paul found 
himself struck by an odd note of honesty in the voice. 
“Not surprised?” Paul asked. 
“I am Scytale, a Tleilaxu of the Face Dancers, and I would know a thing 
before we bargain. Is that a ghola I see behind you, or Duncan Idaho?” 
“It’s Duncan Idaho,” Paul said. “And I will not bargain with you.” 
“I think you’ll bargain,” Scytale said. 
“Duncan,”  Paul  said,  speaking  over  his  shoulder,  “will  you  kill  this 
Tleilaxu if I ask it?” 
“Yes, m’Lord.” There was the suppressed rage of a berserker in Idaho’s 
voice. 
“Wait!” Alia said. “You don’t know what you’re rejecting.” 
“But I do know,” Paul said. 
“So it’s truly Duncan Idaho of the Atreides,” Scytale said. “We found the 
lever! A ghola 
 can  regain his past.” 
Paul  heard  footsteps.  Someone  brushed  past  him  on  the  left.  Scytale’s 
voice came from behind him now. “What do you remember of your past, 
Duncan?” 
“Everything. From my childhood on. I even remember you at the tank 
when they removed me from it,” Idaho said. 
“Wonderful,” Scytale breathed. “Wonderful.” 
Paul  heard  the  voice  moving.   I  need  a  vision ,  he  thought.  Darkness 
frustrated him. Bene Gesserit training warned him of terrifying menace in 
Scytale, yet the creature remained a voice, a shadow of movement—entirely 
beyond him. 
“Are these the Atreides babies?” Scytale asked. 
“Harah!” Paul cried. “Get her away from there!” 
“Stay where you are!” Scytale shouted. “All of you! I warn you, a Face 
Dancer can move faster than you suspect. My knife can have both these lives 
before you touch me.” 
Paul felt someone touch his right arm, then move o? to the right. 
“That’s far enough, Alia,” Scytale said. 
“Alia,” Paul said. “Don’t.” 
“It’s my fault,” Alia groaned. “My fault!” 
“Atreides,” Scytale said, “shall we bargain now?” 
Behind him, Paul heard a single hoarse curse. His throat constricted at the 
suppressed violence in Idaho’s voice. Idaho must not break! Scytale would 
kill the babies! 
“To strike a bargain, one requires a thing to sell,” Scytale said. “Not so, 
Atreides?  Will  you  have  your  Chani  back?  We  can  restore  her  to  you.  A 
ghola,  Atreides.  A  ghola 
  with  full  memory!   But  we  must  hurry.  Call  your 
friends to bring a cryologic tank to preserve the ?esh.” 
To hear Chani’s voice once more , Paul thought.  To feel her presence beside 
me. Ahhh, that’s why they gave me Idaho as a ghola, to let me discover how much 
the recreation is like the original. But now—full restoration … at their price. I’d be 
a Tleilaxu tool forevermore. And Chani … chained to the same fate by a threat to 
our children, exposed once more to the Qizarate’s plotting … 
“What pressures would you use to restore Chani’s memory to her?” Paul 
asked, ?ghting to keep his voice calm. “Would you condition her to… to kill 
one of her own children?” 
“We  use  whatever  pressures  we  need,”  Scytale  said.  “What  say  you, 
Atreides?” 
“Alia,” Paul said, “bargain with this  thing . I cannot bargain with what I 
cannot see.” 
“A wise choice,” Scytale gloated. “Well, Alia, what do you o?er me as 
your brother’s agent?” 
Paul lowered his head, bringing himself to stillness within stillness. He’d 
glimpsed something just then—like a vision, but not a vision. It had been a 
knife close to him. There! 
“Give me a moment to think,” Alia said. 
“My  knife  is  patient,”  Scytale  said,  “but  Chani’s  ?esh  is  not.  Take  a 
reasonable  amount of time.” 
Paul felt himself blinking. It could not be … but it was! He felt eyes! 
Their vantage point was odd and they moved in an erratic way. 
 There!  The 
knife swam into his view. With a breath-stilling shock, Paul recognized the 
viewpoint. It was that of one of his children! he was seeing Scytale’s knife 
hand from within the creche! It glittered only inches from him. Yes—and he 
could see himself across the room, as well—head down, standing quietly, a 
?gure of no menace, ignored by the others in this room. 
“To  begin,  you  might  assign  us  all  your  CHOAM  holdings,”  Scytale 
suggested. 
“All of them?” Alia protested. 
“All.” 
Watching  himself  through  the  eyes  in  the  creche,  Paul  slipped  his 
crysknife from its belt sheath. The movement produced a strange sensation of 
duality. He measured the distance, the angle. There’d be no second chance. 
He prepared his body then in the Bene Gesserit way, armed himself like a 
cocked spring for a single concentrated movement, a 
 prajna  thing requiring 
all his muscles balanced in one exquisite unity. 
The  crysknife  leaped  from  his  hand.  The  milky  blur  of  it  ?ashed  into 
Scytale’s right eye, jerked the Face Dancer’s head back. Scytale threw both 
hands up and staggered backward against the wall. His knife clattered o? the 
ceiling,  to  hit  the  ?oor.  Scytale  rebounded  from  the  wall;  he  fell  face 
forward, dead before he touched the ?oor. 
Still through the eyes in the creche, Paul watched the faces in the room 
turn toward his eyeless ?gure, read the combined shock. Then Alia rushed to 
the creche, bent over it and hid the view from him. 
“Oh, they’re safe,” Alia said. “They’re safe.” 
“M’Lord,” Idaho whispered, “was  that  part of your vision?” 
“No.” He waved a hand in Idaho’s direction. “Let it be.” 
“Forgive me, Paul,” Alia said. “But when that creature said they could … 
revive …” 
“There are some prices an Atreides cannot pay,” Paul said. “You know 
that.” 
“I know,” she sighed. “But I was tempted …” 
“Who was not tempted?” Paul asked. 
He turned away from them, groped his way to a wall, leaned against it 
and tried to understand what he had done. 
 How? How? The eyes in the creche! 
He felt poised on the brink of terrifying revelation. 
“My eyes; father.” 
The word-shapings shimmered before his sightless vision. 
“My son!” Paul whispered, too low for any to hear. “You’re … aware.” 
“Yes, father. Look!” 
Paul sagged against the wall in a spasm of dizziness. He felt that he’d 
been  upended  and  drained.  His  own  life  whipped  past  him.  He  saw  his 
father. He 
 was  his father. And the grandfather, and the grandfathers before 
that. His awareness tumbled through a mind-shattering corridor of his whole 
male line. 
“How?” he asked silently. 
Faint word-shapings appeared, faded and were gone, as though the strain 
was  too  great.  Paul  wiped  saliva  from  the  corner  of  his  mouth.  He 
remembered the awakening of Alia in the Lady Jessica’s womb. But there had 
been no Water of Life, no overdose of melange this time … or had there? Had 
Chani’s hunger been for that? Or was this somehow the genetic product of 
his line, foreseen by the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam? 
Paul felt himself in the creche then, with Alia cooing over him. Her hands 
soothed him. Her face loomed, a giant thing directly over him. She turned 
him then and he saw his creche companion—a girl with that bony-ribbed 
look of strength which came from a desert heritage. She had a full head of 
tawny red hair. As he stared, she opened her eyes. Those eyes! Chani peered 
out of her eyes … and the Lady Jessica. A multitude peered out of those eyes. 
“Look at that,” Alia said. “They’re staring at each other.” 
“Babies can’t focus at this age,” Harah said. 
“I could,” Alia said. 
Slowly, Paul felt himself being disengaged from that endless awareness. 
He was back at his own wailing wall then, leaning against it. Idaho shook his 
shoulder gently. 
“M’Lord?” 
“Let my son be called Leto for my father,” Paul said, straightening. 
“At the time of naming,” Harah said, “I will stand beside you as a friend 
of the mother and give that name.” 
“And my daughter,” Paul said. “Let her be called Ghanima.” 
“Usul!” Harah objected. “Ghanima’s an ill-omened name.” 
“It saved your life,” Paul said. “What matter that Alia made fun of you 
with that name? My daughter is Ghanima, a spoil of war.” 
Paul heard wheels squeak behind him then—the pallet with Chani’s body 
being removed. The chant of the Water Rite began. 
“Hal yawm!” Harah said. “I must leave now if I am to be the observer of 
the holy truth and stand beside my friend for the last time. Her water belongs 
to the tribe.” 
“Her water belongs to the tribe,” Paul murmured. He heard Harah leave. 
He  groped  outward  and  found  Idaho’s  sleeve.  “Take  me  to  my  quarters, 
Duncan.” 
Inside  his  quarters,  he  shook  himself  free  gently.  It  was  a  time  to  be 
alone. But before Idaho could leave there was a disturbance at the door. 
“Master!” It was Bijaz calling from the doorway. 
“Duncan,”  Paul  said,  “let  him  come  two  paces  forward.  Kill  him  if  he 
comes farther.” 
“Ayyah,” Idaho said. 
“Duncan is it?” Bijaz asked. “Is it  truly  Duncan Idaho?” 
“It is,” Idaho said. “I remember.” 
“Then Scytale’s plan succeeded!” 
“Scytale is dead,” Paul said. 
“But I am not and the plan is not,” Bijaz said. “By the tank in which I 
grew! It can be done! I shall have my pasts—all of them. It needs only the 
right trigger.” 
“Trigger?” Paul asked. 
“The compulsion to kill you,” Idaho said, rage thick in his voice. “Mentat 
computation: They found that I thought of you as the son I never had. Rather 
than slay you, the true Duncan Idaho would take over the ghola body. But … 
it might have failed. Tell me, dwarf, if your plan had failed, if I’d killed him, 
what then?” 
“Oh … then we’d have bargained with the sister to save her brother. But 
this way the bargaining is better.” 
Paul took a shuddering breath. He could hear the mourners moving down 
the last passage now toward the deep rooms and the water stills. 
“It’s not too late, m’Lord,” Bijaz said. “Will you have your love back? We 
can  restore  her  to  you.  A  ghola,  yes.  But  now—we  hold  out  the  full 
restoration. Shall we summon servants with a cryological tank, preserve the 
?esh of your beloved …” 
It was harder now, Paul found. He had exhausted his powers in the ?rst 
Tleilaxu  temptation.  And  now  all  that  was  for  nothing!  To  feel  Chani’s 
presence once more … 
“Silence  him,”  Paul  told  Idaho,  speaking  in  Atreides  battle  tongue.  He 
heard Idaho move toward the door. 
“Master!” Bijaz squeaked. 
“As you love me,” Paul said, still in battle tongue, “do me this favor: Kill 
him before I succumb!” 
“Noooooo …” Bijaz screamed. 
The sound stopped abruptly with a frightened grunt. 
“I did him the kindness,” Idaho said. 
Paul bent his head, listening. He no longer could hear the mourners. He 
thought of the ancient Fremen rite being performed now deep in the sietch, 
far down in the room of the death-still where the tribe recovered its water. 
“There was no choice,” Paul said. “You understand that, Duncan?” 
“I understand.” 
“There are some things no one can bear. I meddled in all the possible 
futures I could create until, ?nally, they created me.” 
“M’Lord, you shouldn’t …” 
“There are problems in this universe for which there are no answers,” 
Paul said. “Nothing. Nothing can be done.” 
As he spoke, Paul felt his link with the vision shatter. His mind cowered, 
overwhelmed by in?nite possibilities. His lost vision became like the wind, 
blowing where it willed. 
We say of Muad’Dib that he has gone on a journey into that land where we walk 
without footprints 
. 
—Preamble to the Qizarate Creed 
There was a dike of water against the sand, an outer limit for the plantings of 
the sietch holding. A rock bridge came next and then the open desert beneath 
Idaho’s feet. The promontory of Sietch Tabr dominated the night sky behind 
him.  The  light  of  both  moons  frosted  its  high  rim.  An  orchard  had  been 
brought right down to the water. 
Idaho paused on the desert side and stared back at ?owered branches 
over  silent  water—re?ections  and  reality—four  moons.  The  stillsuit  felt 
greasy against his skin. Wet ?int odors invaded his nostrils past the ?lters. 
There  was  a  malignant  simpering  to  the  wind  through  the  orchard.  He 
listened for night sounds. Kangaroo mice inhabited the grass at the water 
verge; a hawk owl bounced its droning call into the cli? shadows; the wind- 
broken hiss of a sandfall came from the open bled. 
Idaho turned toward the sound. 
He could see no movement out there on the moonlit dunes. 
It was Tandis who had brought Paul this far. Then the man had returned 
to tell his account. And Paul had walked out into the desert—like a Fremen. 
“He was blind—truly blind,” Tandis had said, as though that explained it. 
“Before that, he had the vision which he told to us … but …” 
A shrug. Blind Fremen were abandoned in the desert. Muad’Dib might be 
Emperor, but he was also Fremen. Had he not made provision that Fremen 
guard and raise his children? He was Fremen. 
It  was  a  skeleton  desert  here,  Idaho  saw.  Moon-silvered  ribs  of  rock 
showed through the sand; then the dunes began. 
I should not have left him alone, not even for a minute , Idaho thought.  I knew 
what was in his mind 
. 
“He told me the future no longer needed his physical presence,” Tandis 
had reported. “When he left me, he called back. ‘Now I am free’ were his 
words.” 
Damn them!  Idaho thought. 
The Fremen had refused to send ’thopters or searchers of any kind. Rescue 
was against their ancient customs. 
“There  will  be  a  worm  for  Muad’Dib,”  they  said.  And  they  began  the 
chant for those committed to the desert, the ones whose water went to Shai- 
hulud:  “Mother  of  sand,  father  of  Time,  beginning  of  Life,  grant  him 
passage.” 
Idaho seated himself on a ?at rock and stared at the desert. The night out 
there was ?lled with camou?age patterns. There was no way to tell where 
Paul had gone. 
“Now I am free.” 
Idaho spoke the words aloud, surprised by the sound of his own voice. 
For a time, he let his mind run, remembering a day when he’d taken the 
child Paul to the sea market on Caladan, the dazzling glare of a sun on water, 
the sea’s riches brought up dead, there to be sold. Idaho remembered Gurney 
Halleck playing music of the baliset for them—pleasure, laughter. Rhythms 
pranced in his awareness, leading his mind like a thrall down channels of 
remembered delight. 
Gurney Halleck. Gurney would blame him for this tragedy. 
Memory music faded. 
He  recalled  Paul’s  words:  “ There  are  problems  in  this  universe  for  which 
there are no answers 
.” 
Idaho  began  to  wonder  how  Paul  would  die  out  there  in  the  desert. 
Quickly, killed by a worm? Slowly, in the sun? Some of the Fremen back 
there in the sietch had said Muad’Dib would never die, that he had entered 
the ruh-world where all possible futures existed, that he would be present 
henceforth in the 
 alam al-mythal , wandering there endlessly even after his 
?esh had ceased to be. 
He’ll die and I’m powerless to prevent it , Idaho thought. 
He began to realize that there might be a certain fastidious courtesy in 
dying without a trace—no remains, nothing, and an entire planet for a tomb. 
Mentat, solve thyself , he thought. 
Words  intruded  on  his  memory—the  ritual  words  of  the  Fedaykin 
lieutenant, posting a guard over Muad’Dib’s children: “It shall be the solemn 
duty of the o?cer in charge …” 
The plodding, self-important language of government enraged him. It had 
seduced  the  Fremen.  It  had  seduced  everyone.  A  man,  a  great  man,  was 
dying out there, but language plodded on … and on … and on … 
What  had  happened,  he  wondered,  to  all  the  clean  meanings  that 
screened out nonsense? Somewhere, in some lost 
 where  which the Imperium 
had created, they’d been walled o?, sealed against chance rediscovery. His 
mind quested for solutions, mentat fashion. Patterns of knowledge glistened 
there.  Lorelei  hair  might  shimmer  thus,  beckoning  …  beckoning  the 
enchanted seaman into emerald caverns… 
With an abrupt start, Idaho drew back from catatonic forgetfulness. 
So!  he thought.  Rather than face my failure, I would disappear within myself! 
The instant of that almost-plunge remained in his memory. Examining it, 
he felt his life stretch out as long as the existence of the universe. Real ?esh 
lay condensed, ?nite in its emerald cavern of awareness, but in?nite life had 
shared his being. 
Idaho stood up, feeling cleansed by the desert. Sand was beginning to 
chatter in the wind, pecking at the surfaces of leaves in the orchard behind 
him. There was the dry and abrasive smell of dust in the night air. His robe 
whipped to the pulse of a sudden gust. 
Somewhere  far  out  in  the  bled,  Idaho  realized,  a  mother  storm  raged, 
lifting vortices of winding dust in hissing violence—a giant worm of sand 
powerful enough to cut ?esh from bones. 
He will become one with the desert , Idaho thought.  The desert will ful?ll him . 
It was a Zensunni thought washing through his mind like clear water. 
Paul would go on marching out there, he knew. An Atreides would not give 
himself  up  completely  to  destiny,  not  even  in  the  full  awareness  of  the 
inevitable. 
A touch of prescience came over Idaho then, and he saw that people of 
the future would speak of Paul in terms of seas. Despite a life soaked in dust, 
water  would  follow  him.  “His  ?esh  foundered,”  they  would  say,  “but  he 
swam on.” 
Behind Idaho, a man cleared his throat. 
Idaho turned to discern the ?gure of Stilgar standing on the bridge over 
the qanat. 
“He will not be found,” Stilgar said. “Yet all men will ?nd him.” 
“The  desert  takes  him—and  dei?es  him,”  Idaho  said.  “Yet  he  was  an 
interloper here. He brought an alien chemistry to this planet—water.” 
“The desert imposes its own rhythms,” Stilgar said. “We welcomed him, 
called him our Mahdi, our Muad’Dib, and gave him his secret name, Base of 
the Pillar: Usul.” 
“Still, he was not born a Fremen.” 
“And that does not change the fact that we claimed him … and have 
claimed him ?nally.” Stilgar put a hand on Idaho’s shoulder. “All men are 
interlopers, old friend.” 
“You’re a deep one, aren’t you, Stil?” 
“Deep enough. I can see how we clutter the universe with our migrations. 
Muad’Dib gave us something uncluttered. Men will remember his Jihad for 
that, at least.” 
“He won’t give up to the desert,” Idaho said. “He’s blind, but he won’t 
give up. He’s a man of honor and principle. He was Atreides-trained.” 
“And  his  water  will  be  poured  on  the  sand,”  Stilgar  said.  “Come.”  He 
pulled gently at Idaho’s arm. “Alia is back and is asking for you.” 
“She was with you at Sietch Makab?” 
“Yes—she helped whip those soft Naibs into line. They take her orders 
now … as I do.” 
“What orders?” 
“She commanded the execution of the traitors.” 
“Oh.”  Idaho  suppressed  a  feeling  of  vertigo  as  he  looked  up  at  the 
promontory. “Which traitors?” 
“The Guildsman, the Reverend Mother Mohiam, Korba … a few others.” 
“You slew a Reverend Mother?” 
“I did. Muad’Dib left word that it should not be done.” He shrugged. “But 
I disobeyed him, as Alia knew I would.” 
Idaho  stared  again  into  the  desert,  feeling  himself  become  whole,  one 
person  capable  of  seeing  the  pattern  of  what  Paul  had  created. 
  Judgment 
strategy 
, the Atreides called it in their training manuals.  People are subordinate 
to  government,  but  the  ruled  in?uence  the  rulers 
.  Did  the  ruled  have  any 
concept, he wondered, of what they had helped create here? 
“Alia …” Stilgar said, clearing his throat. He sounded embarrassed. “She 
needs the comfort of your presence.” 
“And she is the government,” Idaho murmured. 
“A regency, no more.” 
“Fortune passes everywhere, as her father often said,” Idaho muttered. 
“We  make  our  bargain  with  the  future,”  Stilgar  said.  “Will  you  come 
now? We need you back there.” Again, he sounded embarrassed. “She is … 
distraught. She cries out against her brother one moment, mourns him the 
next.” 
“Presently,” Idaho promised. He heard Stilgar leave. He stood facing into 
the rising wind, letting the grains of sand rattle against the stillsuit. 
Mentat awareness projected the out?owing patterns into the future. The 
possibilities  dazzled  him.  Paul  had  set  in  motion  a  whirling  vortex  and 
nothing could stand in its path. 
The Bene Tleilax and the Guild had overplayed their hands and had lost, 
were  discredited.  The  Qizarate  was  shaken  by  the  treason  of  Korba  and 
others high within it. And Paul’s ?nal voluntary act, his ultimate acceptance 
of their customs, had ensured the loyalty of the Fremen to him and to his 
house. He was one of them forever now. 
“Paul is gone!” Alia’s voice choked. She had come up almost silently to 
where Idaho stood and was now beside hm. “He was a fool, Duncan!” 
“Don’t say that!” he snapped. 
“The whole universe will say it before I’m through,” she said. 
“Why, for the love of heaven?” 
“For the love of my brother, not of heaven.” 
Zensunni insight dilated his awareness. He could sense that there was no 
vision  in  her—had  been  none  since  Chani’s  death.  “You  practice  an  odd 
love,” he said. 
“Love? Duncan, he had but to step o? the track! What matter that the rest 
of the universe would have come shattering down behind him? He’d have 
been safe … and Chani with him!” 
“Then … why didn’t he?” 
“For the love of heaven,” she whispered. Then, more loudly, she said: 
“Paul’s entire life was a struggle to escape his Jihad and its dei?cation. At 
least, he’s free of it. He chose this!” 
“Ah, yes—the oracle.” Idaho shook his head in wonder. “Even Chani’s 
death. His moon fell.” 
“He  was  a fool, wasn’t he, Duncan?” 
Idaho’s throat tightened with suppressed grief. 
“Such a fool!” Alia gasped, her control breaking. “He’ll live forever while 
we must die!” 
“Alia, don’t …” 
“It’s just grief,” she said, voice low. “Just grief. Do you know what I must 
do for him? I must save the life of the Princess Irulan. That one! You should 
hear 
 her  grief. Wailing, giving moisture to the dead; she swears she loved 
him and knew it not. She reviles her Sisterhood, says she’ll spend her life 
teaching Paul’s children.” 
“You trust her?” 
“She reeks of trustworthiness!” 
“Ahhh,”  Idaho  murmured.  The  ?nal  pattern  unreeled  before  his 
awareness like a design on fabric. The defection of the Princess Irulan was 
the last step. It left the Bene Gesserit with no remaining lever against the 
Atreides heirs. 
Alia began to sob, leaned against him, face pressed into his chest. “Ohhh, 
Duncan, Duncan! He’s gone!” 
Idaho put his lips against her hair. “Please,” he whispered. He felt her 
grief mingling with his like two streams entering the same pool. 
“I need you, Duncan,” she sobbed. “Love me!” 
“I do,” he whispered. 
She  lifted  her  head,  peered  at  the  moon-frosted  outline  of  his  face.  “I 
know, Duncan. Love knows love.” 
Her words sent a shudder through him, a feeling of estrangement from his 
old self. He had come out here looking for one thing and had found another. 
It was as though he’d lurched into a room full of familiar people only to 
realize too late that he knew none of them. 
She  pushed  away  from  him,  took  his  hand.  “Will  you  come  with  me, 
Duncan?” 
“Wherever you lead,” he said. 
She led him back across the qanat into the darkness at the base of the 
massif and its Place of Safety. 
EPILOGUE 
No bitter stench of funeral-still for Muad’Dib . 
No knell nor solemn rite to free the mind 
From avaricious shadows . 
He is the fool saint , 
The golden stranger living forever 
On the edge of reason . 
Let your guard fall and he is there! 
His crimson peace and sovereign pallor 
Strike into our universe on prophetic webs 
To the verge of a quiet glance—there! 
Out of bristling star-jungles: 
Mysterious, lethal, an oracle without eyes , 
Catspaw of prophecy, whose voice never dies! 
Shai-hulud, he awaits thee upon a strand 
Where couples walk and ?x, eye to eye , 
The delicious ennui of love . 
He strides through the long cavern of time , 
Scattering the fool-self of his dream . 
—The Ghola’s Hymn 
APPENDIX I 
  
APPENDIX I 
The Ecology of Dune 
Beyond  a  critical  point  within  a  ?nite  space,  freedom  diminishes  as  numbers 
increase. This is as true of humans in the ?nite space of a planetary ecosystem as 
it is of gas molecules in a sealed ?ask. The human question is not how many can 
possibly survive within the system, but what kind of existence is possible for those 
who do survive 
. 
—Pardot Kynes, First Planetologist of Arrakis 
The  e?ect  of  Arrakis  on  the  mind  of  the  newcomer  usually  is  that  of 
overpowering barren land. The stranger might think nothing could live or 
grow in the open here, that this was the true wasteland that had never been 
fertile and never would be. 
To  Pardot  Kynes,  the  planet  was  merely  an  expression  of  energy,  a 
machine being driven by its sun. What it needed was reshaping to ?t it to 
man’s needs. His mind went directly to the free-moving human population, 
the  Fremen.  What  a  challenge!  What  a  tool  they  could  be!  Fremen:  an 
ecological and geological force of almost unlimited potential. 
A direct and simple man in many ways, Pardot Kynes. One must evade 
Harkonnen restrictions? Excellent. Then one marries a Fremen woman. When 
she gives you a Fremen son, you begin with him, with Liet-Kynes, and the 
other children, teaching them ecological literacy, creating a new language 
with  symbols  that  arm  the  mind  to  manipulate  an  entire  landscape,  its 
climate, seasonal limits, and ?nally to break through all ideas of force into 
the dazzling awareness of 
 order . 
“There’s an internally recognized beauty of motion and balance on any 
man-healthy  planet,”  Kynes  said.  “You  see  in  this  beauty  a  dynamic 
stabilizing  e?ect  essential  to  all  life.  Its  aim  is  simple:  to  maintain  and 
produce coordinated patterns of greater and greater diversity. Life improves 
the closed system’s capacity to sustain life. Life—all life—is in the service of 
life.  Necessary  nutrients  are  made  available  to  life 
  by   life  in  greater  and 
greater richness as the diversity of life increases. The entire landscape comes 
alive, ?lled with relationships and relationships within relationships.” 
This was Pardot Kynes lecturing to a sietch warren class. 
Before  the  lectures,  though,  he  had  to  convince  the  Fremen.  To 
understand how this came about, you must ?rst understand the enormous 
single-mindedness, the innocence with which he approached any problem. 
He was not naive, he merely permitted himself no distractions. 
He was exploring the Arrakis landscape in a one-man groundcar one hot 
afternoon  when  he  stumbled  onto  a  deplorably  common  scene.  Six 
Harkonnen  bravos,  shielded  and  fully  armed,  had  trapped  three  Fremen 
youths in the open behind the Shield Wall near the village of Windsack. To 
Kynes, it was a ding-dong battle, more slapstick than real, until he focused on 
the fact that the Harkonnens intended to kill the Fremen. By this time, one of 
the youths was down with a severed artery, two of the bravos were down as 
well, but it was still four armed men against two striplings. 
Kynes wasn’t brave; he merely had that single-mindedness and caution. 
The Harkonnens were killing Fremen. They were destroying the tools with 
which he intended to remake a planet! He triggered his own shield, waded in 
and had two of the Harkonnens dead with a slip-tip before they knew anyone 
was behind them. He dodged a sword thrust from one of the others, slit the 
man’s throat with a neat 
 entrisseur , and left the lone remaining bravo to the 
two  Fremen  youths,  turning  his  full  attention  to  saving  the  lad  on  the 
ground. And save the lad he did … while the sixth Harkonnen was being 
dispatched. 
Now here was a pretty kettle of sandtrout! The Fremen didn’t know what 
to make of Kynes. They knew who he was, of course. No man arrived on 
Arrakis without a full dossier ?nding its way into the Fremen strongholds. 
They knew him: he was an Imperial servant. 
But he killed Harkonnens! 
Adults might have shrugged and, with some regret, sent his shade to join 
those  of  the  six  dead  men  on  the  ground.  But  these  Fremen  were 
inexperienced youths and all they could see was that they owed this Imperial 
servant a mortal obligation. 
Kynes wound up two days later in a sietch that looked down on Wind 
Pass. To him, it was all very natural. He talked to the Fremen about water, 
about dunes anchored by grass, about palmaries ?lled with date palms, about 
open qanats ?owing across the desert. He talked and talked and talked. 
All around him raged a debate that Kynes never saw. What to do with this 
madman? He knew the location of a major sietch. What to do? What of his 
words, this mad talk about a paradise on Arrakis? Just talk. He knows too 
much. But he killed Harkonnens! What of the water burden? When did we 
owe  the  Imperium  anything?  He  killed  Harkonnens.  Anyone  can  kill 
Harkonnens. I have done it myself. 
But what of this talk about the ?owering of Arrakis? 
Very simple: Where is the water for this? 
He says it is here! And he  did  save three of ours. 
He  saved  three  fools  who  had  put  themselves  in  the  way  of  the 
Harkonnen ?st! And he has seen crysknives! 
The necessary decision was known for hours before it was voiced. The tau 
of  a  sietch  tells  its  members  what  they  must  do;  even  the  most  brutal 
necessity is known. An experienced ?ghter was sent with a consecrated knife 
to do the job. Two watermen followed him to get the water from the body. 
Brutal necessity. 
It’s doubtful that Kynes even focused on his would-be executioner. He was 
talking to a group that spread around him at a cautious distance. He walked 
as he talked: a short circle, gesturing. Open water, Kynes said. Walk in the 
open without stillsuits. Water for dipping it out of a pond! Portyguls! 
The knifeman confronted him. 
“Remove  yourself,”  Kynes  said,  and  went  on  talking  about  secret 
windtraps.  He  brushed  past  the  man.  Kynes’  back  stood  open  for  the 
ceremonial blow. 
What went on in that would-be executioner’s mind cannot be known now. 
Did he ?nally listen to Kynes and believe? Who knows? But what he did is a 
matter of record. Uliet was his name, 
 Older  Liet. Uliet walked three paces and 
deliberately fell on his own knife, thus “removing” himself. Suicide? Some 
say Shai-hulud moved him. 
Talk about omens! 
From  that  instant,  Kynes  had  but  to  point,  saying  “Go  there.”  Entire 
Fremen tribes went. Men died, women died, children died. But they went. 
Kynes  returned  to  his  Imperial  chores,  directing  the  Biological  Testing 
Stations. And now, Fremen began to appear among the Station personnel. 
The  Fremen  looked  at  each  other.  They  were  in?ltrating  the  “system,”  a 
possibility they’d never considered. Station tools began ?nding their way into 
the sietch warrens—especially cutterays which were used to dig underground 
catchbasins and hidden windtraps. 
Water began collecting in the basins. 
It became apparent to the Fremen that Kynes was not a madman totally, 
just mad enough to be holy. He was one of the umma, the brotherhood of 
prophets.  The  shade  of  Uliet  was  advanced  to  the  sadus,  the  throng  of 
heavenly judges. 
Kynes—direct,  savagely  intent  Kynes—knew  that  highly  organized 
research  is  guaranteed  to  produce  nothing  new.  He  set  up  small-unit 
experiments with regular interchange of data for a swift Tansley e?ect, let 
each group ?nd its own path. They must accumulate millions of tiny facts. 
He  organized  only  isolated  and  rough  run-through  tests  to  put  their 
di?culties into perspective. 
Core samplings were made throughout the bled. Charts were developed 
on the long drifts of weather that are called climate. He found that in the 
wide belt contained by the 70-degree lines, north and south, temperatures for 
thousands  of  years  hadn’t  gone  outside  the  254–332  degrees  (absolute) 
range,  and  that  this  belt  had  long  growing  seasons  where  temperatures 
ranged from 284 to 302 degrees absolute: the “bonanza” range for terraform 
life … once they solved the water problem. 
When will we solve it? the Fremen asked. When will we see Arrakis as a 
paradise? 
In the manner of a teacher answering a child who has asked the sum of 2 
plus 2, Kynes told them: “From three hundred to ?ve hundred years.” 
A lesser folk might have howled in dismay. But the Fremen had learned 
patience from men with whips. It was a bit longer than they had anticipated, 
but they all could see that the blessed day was coming. They tightened their 
sashes  and  went  back  to  work.  Somehow,  the  disappointment  made  the 
prospect of paradise more real. 
The concern on Arrakis was not with water, but with moisture. Pets were 
almost  unknown,  stock  animals  rare.  Some  smugglers  employed  the 
domesticated desert ass, the kulon, but the water price was high even when 
the beasts were ?tted with modi?ed stillsuits. 
Kynes thought of installing reduction plants to recover water from the 
hydrogen and oxygen locked in native rock, but the energy-cost factor was 
far too high. The polar caps (disregarding the false sense of water security 
they gave the pyons) held far too small an amount for his project … and he 
already  suspected  where  the  water  had  to  be.  There  was  that  consistent 
increase of moisture at median altitudes, and in certain winds. There was 
that  primary  clue  in  the  air  balance—23  per  cent  oxygen,  75.4  per  cent 
nitrogen and .023 per cent carbon dioxide—with the trace gases taking up 
the rest. 
There was a rare native root plant that grew above the 2,500-meter level 
in the northern temperate zone. A tuber two meters long yielded half a liter 
of  water.  And  there  were  the  terraform  desert  plants:  the  tougher  ones 
showed  signs  of  thriving  if  planted  in  depressions  lined  with  dew 
precipitators. 
Then Kynes saw the salt pan. 
His ’thopter, ?ying between stations far out on the bled, was blown o? 
course by a storm. When the storm passed, there was the pan—a giant oval 
depression some three hundred kilometers on the long axis—a glaring white 
surprise  in  the  open  desert.  Kynes  landed,  tasted  the  pan’s  storm-cleaned 
surface. 
Salt. 
Now, he was certain. 
There’d been open water on Arrakis—once. He began re-examining the 
evidence of the dry wells where trickles of water had appeared and vanished, 
never to return. 
Kynes set his newly trained Fremen limnologists to work: their chief clue, 
leathery scraps of matter sometimes found with the spice-mass after a blow. 
This had been ascribed to a ?ctional “sandtrout” in Fremen folk stories. As 
facts grew into evidence, a creature emerged to explain these leathery scraps 
—a  sandswimmer  that  blocked  o?  water  into  fertile  pockets  within  the 
porous lower strata below the 280° (absolute) line. 
This “water-stealer” died by the millions in each spice-blow. A ?ve-degree 
change in temperature could kill it. The few survivors entered a semidormant 
cyst-hibernation to emerge in six years as small (about three meters long) 
sandworms. Of these, only a few avoided their larger brothers and the pre- 
spice water pockets to emerge into maturity as the giant shai-hulud. (Water 
is poisonous to shai-hulud as the Fremen had long known from drowning the 
rare “stunted worm” of the Minor Erg to produce the awareness-spectrum 
narcotic they call Water of Life. The “stunted worm” is a primitive form of 
shai-hulud that reaches a length of only about nine meters.) 
Now they had the circular relationship: little maker to pre-spice mass; 
little maker to shai-hulud; shai-hulud to scatter the spice upon which fed 
microscopic creatures called sand plankton, the sand plankton, food for shai- 
hulud, growing, burrowing, becoming little makers. 
Kynes and his people turned their attention from these great relationships 
and focused now on micro-ecology. First, the climate: the sand surface often 
reached  temperatures  of  344°  to  350°  (absolute).  A  foot  below  ground  it 
might be 55° cooler; a foot above ground, 25° cooler. Leaves or black shade 
could provide another 18° of cooling. Next, the nutrients: sand of Arrakis is 
mostly a product of worm digestion; dust (the truly omnipresent problem 
there) is produced by the constant surface creep, the “saltation” movement of 
sand.  Coarse  grains  are  found  on  the  downwind  sides  of  dunes.  The 
windward side is packed smooth and hard. Old dunes are yellow (oxidized), 
young dunes are the color of the parent rock—usually gray. 
Downwind  sides  of  old  dunes  provided  the  ?rst  plantation  areas.  The 
Fremen aimed ?rst for a cycle of poverty grass with peatlike hair cilia to 
intertwine, mat and ?x the dunes by depriving the wind of its big weapon: 
movable grains. 
Adaptive  zones  were  laid  out  in  the  deep  south  far  from  Harkonnen 
watchers.  The  mutated  poverty  grasses  were  planted  ?rst  along  the 
downwind (slipface) of the chosen dunes that stood across the path of the 
prevailing westerlies. With the downwind face anchored, the windward face 
grew higher and higher and the grass was moved to keep pace. Giant sifs 
(long  dunes  with  sinuous  crest)  of  more  than  1,500  meters  height  were 
produced this way. 
When barrier dunes reached su?cient height, the windward faces were 
planted with tougher sword grasses. Each structure on a base about six times 
as thick as its height was anchored—“?xed.” 
Now,  they  came  in  with  deeper  plantings—ephemerals  (chenopods, 
pigweeds,  and  amaranth  to  begin),  then  scotch  broom,  low  lupine,  vine 
eucalyptus  (the  type  adapted  for  Caladan’s  northern  reaches),  dwarf 
tamarisk, shore pine—then the true desert growths: candelilla, saguaro, and 
bis-naga,  the  barrel  cactus.  Where  it  would  grow,  they  introduced  camel 
sage, onion grass, gobi feather grass, wild alfalfa, burrow bush, sand verbena, 
evening primrose, incense bush, smoke tree, creosote bush. 
They turned then to the necessary animal life—burrowing creatures to 
open  the  soil  and  aerate  it:  kit  fox,  kangaroo  mouse,  desert  hare,  sand 
terrapin … and the predators to keep them in check: desert hawk, dwarf owl, 
eagle  and  desert  owl;  and  insects  to  ?ll  the  niches  these  couldn’t  reach: 
scorpion, centipede, trapdoor spider, the biting wasp and the worm?y … and 
the desert bat to keep watch on these. 
Now came the crucial test: date palms, cotton, melons, co?ee, medicinals 
—more than 200 selected food plant types to test and adapt. 
“The thing the ecologically illiterate don’t realize about an ecosystem,” 
Kynes said, “is that it’s a system. A system! A system maintains a certain ?uid 
stability that can be destroyed by a misstep in just one niche. A system has 
order,  a  ?owing  from  point  to  point.  If  something  dams  that  ?ow,  order 
collapses. The untrained might miss that collapse until it was too late. That’s 
why the highest function of ecology is the understanding of consequences.” 
Had they achieved a system? 
Kynes and his people watched and waited. The Fremen now knew what 
he meant by an open-end prediction to ?ve hundred years. 
A report came up from the palmaries: 
At the desert edge of the plantings, the sand plankton is being poisoned 
through  interaction  with  the  new  forms  of  life.  The  reason:  protein 
incompatibility. Poisonous water was forming there which the Arrakis life 
would  not  touch.  A  barren  zone  surrounded  the  plantings  and  even  shai- 
hulud would not invade it. 
Kynes went down to the palmaries himself—a twenty-thumper trip (in a 
palanquin like a wounded man or Reverend Mother because he never became 
a sandrider). He tested the barren zone (it stank to heaven) and came up 
with a bonus, a gift from Arrakis. 
The addition of sulfur and ?xed nitrogen converted the barren zone to a 
rich plant bed for terraform life. The plantings could be advanced at will! 
“Does this change the timing?” the Fremen asked. 
Kynes went back to his planetary formulae. Windtrap ?gures were fairly 
secure by then. He was generous with his allowances, knowing he couldn’t 
draw neat lines around ecological problems. A certain amount of plant cover 
had to be set aside to hold dunes in place; a certain amount for foodstu?s 
(both human and animal); a certain amount to lock moisture in root systems 
and to feed water out into surrounding parched areas. They’d mapped the 
roving cold spots on the open bled by this time. These had to be ?gured into 
the formulae. Even shai-hulud had a place in the charts. He must never be 
destroyed,  else  spice  wealth  would  end.  But  his  inner  digestive  “factory,” 
with its enormous concentrations of aldehydes and acids, was a giant source 
of  oxygen.  A  medium  worm  (about  200  meters  long)  discharged  into  the 
atmosphere  as  much  oxygen  as  ten  square  kilometers  of  green-growing 
photosynthesis surface. 
He had the Guild to consider. The spice bribe to the Guild for preventing 
weather  satellites  and  other  watchers  in  the  skies  of  Arrakis  already  had 
reached major proportions. 
Nor  could  the  Fremen  be  ignored.  Especially  the  Fremen,  with  their 
windtraps  and  irregular  landholdings  organized  around  water  supply;  the 
Fremen with their new ecological literacy and their dream of cycling vast 
areas of Arrakis through a prairie phase into forest cover. 
From the charts emerged a ?gure. Kynes reported it. Three per cent. If 
they could get three per cent of the green plant element on Arrakis involved 
in forming carbon compounds, they’d have their self-sustaining cycle. 
“But how long?” the Fremen demanded. 
“Oh, that: about three hundred and ?fty years.” 
So it was true as this umma had said in the beginning: the thing would 
not come in the lifetime of any man now living, nor in the lifetime of their 
grandchildren eight times removed, but it would come. 
The work continued: building, planting, digging, training the children. 
Then Kynes-the-Umma was killed in the cave-in at Plaster Basin. 
By  this  time  his  son,  Liet-Kynes,  was  nineteen,  a  full  Fremen  and 
sandrider who had killed a hundred Harkonnens. The Imperial appointment 
for which the elder Kynes already had applied in the name of his son was 
delivered as a matter of course. The rigid class structure of the faufreluches 
had its well-ordered purpose here. The son had been trained to follow the 
father. 
The course had been set by this time, the Ecological-Fremen were aimed 
along their way. Liet-Kynes had only to watch and nudge and spy upon the 
Harkonnens … until the day his planet was a?icted by a Hero. 
APPENDIX II 
  
APPENDIX II 
The Religion of Dune 
Before the coming of Muad’Dib, the Fremen of Arrakis practiced a religion 
whose roots in the Maometh Saari are there for any scholar to see. Many 
have traced the extensive borrowings from other religions. The most common 
example  is  the  Hymn  to  Water,  a  direct  copy  from  the  Orange  Catholic 
Liturgical Manual, calling for rain clouds which Arrakis had never seen. But 
there are more profound points of accord between the Kitab al-Ibar of the 
Fremen and the teachings of Bible, Ilm, and Fiqh. 
Any comparison of the religious beliefs dominant in the Imperium up to 
the time of Muad’Dib must start with the major forces which shaped those 
beliefs: 
1.  The  followers  of  the  Fourteen  Sages,  whose  Book  was  the  Orange 
Catholic  Bible,  and  whose  views  are  expressed  in  the  Commentaries  and 
other  literature  produced  by  the  Commission  of  Ecumenical  Translators 
(C.E.T.); 
2. The Bene Gesserit, who privately denied they were a religious order, 
but who operated behind an almost impenetrable screen of ritual mysticism, 
and whose training, whose symbolism, organization, and internal teaching 
methods were almost wholly religious; 
3. The agnostic ruling class (including the Guild) for whom religion was a 
kind of puppet show to amuse the populace and keep it docile, and who 
believed essentially that all phenomena—even religious phenomena—could 
be reduced to mechanical explanations; 
4.  The  so-called  Ancient  Teachings—including  those  preserved  by  the 
Zensunni Wanderers from the ?rst, second, and third Islamic movements; the 
Navachristianity of Chusuk, the Buddislamic Variants of the types dominant 
at Lankiveil and Sikun, the Blend Books of the Mahayana Lankavatara, the 
Zen  Hekiganshu  of  III  Delta  Pavonis,  the  Tawrah  and  Talmudic  Zabur 
surviving on Salusa Secundus, the pervasive Obeah Ritual, the Muadh Quran 
with  its  pure  Ilm  and  Fiqh  preserved  among  the  pundi  rice  farmers  of 
Caladan,  the  Hindu  outcroppings  found  all  through  the  universe  in  little 
pockets of insulated pyons, and ?nally, the Butilerian Jihad. 
There  is  a ?fth force which shaped religious belief, but its e?ect is so 
universal and profound that it deserves to stand alone. 
This  is,  of  course,  space  travel—and  in  any  discussion  of  religion,  it 
deserves to be written thus: 
SPACE TRAVEL! 
Mankind’s  movement  through  deep  space  placed  a  unique  stamp  on 
religion  during  the  one  hundred  and  ten  centuries  that  preceded  the 
Butlerian Jihad. To begin with, early space travel, although widespread, was 
largely unregulated, slow, and uncertain, and, before the Guild monopoly, 
was accomplished by a hodgepodge of methods. The ?rst space experiences, 
poorly  communicated  and  subject  to  extreme  distortion,  were  a  wild 
inducement to mystical speculation. 
Immediately, space gave a di?erent ?avor and sense to ideas of Creation. 
That  di?erence  is  seen  even  in  the  highest  religious  achievements  of  the 
period. All through religion, the feeling of the sacred was touched by anarchy 
from the outer dark. 
It was as though Jupiter in all his descendant forms retreated into the 
maternal  darkness  to  be  superseded  by  a  female  immanence  ?lled  with 
ambiguity and with a face of many terrors. 
The ancient formulae intertwined, tangled together as they were ?tted to 
the  needs  of  new  conquests  and  new  heraldic  symbols.  It  was  a  time  of 
struggle  between  beast-demons  on  the  one  side  and  the  old  prayers  and 
invocations on the other. 
There was never a clear decision. 
During this period, it was said that Genesis was reinterpreted, permitting 
God to say: 
“Increase and multiply, and ?ll the  universe , and subdue it, and rule over 
all manner of strange beasts and living creatures in the in?nite airs, on the 
in?nite earths and beneath them.” 
It was a time of sorceresses whose powers were real. The measure of them 
is seen in the fact they never boasted how they grasped the ?rebrand. 
Then  came  the  Butlerian  Jihad—two  generations  of  chaos.  The  god  of 
machine-logic was overthrown among the masses and a new concept was 
raised: 
“Man may not be replaced.” 
Those  two  generations  of  violence  were  a  thalamic  pause  for  all 
humankind. Men looked at their gods and their rituals and saw that both 
were ?lled with that most terrible of all equations: fear over ambition. 
Hesitantly, the leaders of religions whose followers had spilled the blood 
of billions began meeting to exchange views. It was a move encouraged by 
the  Spacing  Guild,  which  was  beginning  to  build  its  monopoly  over  all 
interstellar  travel,  and  by  the  Bene  Gesserit  who  were  banding  the 
sorceresses. 
Out of those ?rst ecumenical meetings came two major developments: 
1.  The  realization  that  all  religions  had  at  least  one  common 
commandment: “Thou shalt not dis?gure the soul.” 
2. The Commission of Ecumenical Translators. 
C.E.T. convened on a neutral island of Old Earth, spawning ground of the 
mother religions. They met “in the common belief that there exists a Divine 
Essence in the universe.” Every faith with more than a million followers was 
represented, and they reached a surprisingly immediate agreement on the 
statement of their common goal: 
“We are here to remove a primary weapon from the hands of disputant 
religions.  That  weapon—the  claim  to  possession  of  the  one  and  only 
revelation.” 
Jubilation at this “sign of profound accord” proved premature. For more 
than a standard year, that statement was the only announcement from C.E.T. 
Men spoke bitterly of the delay. Troubadours composed witty, biting songs 
about the one hundred and twenty-one “Old Cranks” as the C.E.T. delegates 
came to be called. (The name arose from a ribald joke which played on the 
C.E.T. initials and called the delegates “Cranks—E?ng-Turners.”) One of the 
songs, “Brown Repose,” has undergone periodic revival and is popular today: 
“Consider leis, 
Brown repose—and 
The tragedy 
In all of those 
Cranks! All those Cranks! 
So laze—so laze 
Through all your days. 
Time has toll’d for 
M’Lord Sandwich!” 
Occasional rumors leaked out of the C.E.T. sessions. It was said they were 
comparing  texts  and,  irresponsibly,  the  texts  were  named.  Such  rumors 
inevitably  provoked  anti-ecumenism  riots  and,  of  course,  inspired  new 
witticisms. 
Two years passed … three years. 
The Commissioners, nine of their original number having died and been 
replaced,  paused  to  observe  formal  installation  of  the  replacements  and 
announced they were laboring to produce one book, weeding out “all the 
pathological symptoms” of the religious past. 
“We are producing an instrument of Love to be played in all ways,” they 
said. 
Many consider it odd that this statement provoked the worst outbreaks of 
violence  against  ecumenism.  Twenty  delegates  were  recalled  by  their 
congregations. One committed suicide by stealing a space frigate and diving 
it into the sun. 
Historians estimate the riots took eighty million lives. That works out to 
about six thousand for each world then in the Landsraad League. Considering 
the unrest of the time, this may not be an excessive estimate, although any 
pretense  to  real  accuracy  in  the  ?gure  must  be  just  that—pretense. 
Communication between worlds was at one of its lowest ebbs. 
The  troubadours,  quite  naturally,  had  a  ?eld  day.  A  popular  musical 
comedy of the period had one of the C.E.T. delegates sitting on a white sand 
beach beneath a palm tree singing: 
“For God, woman and the splendor of love 
We dally here sans fears or cares. 
Troubadour! Troubadour, sing another melody 
For God, woman and the splendor of love!” 
Riots and comedy are but symptoms of the times, profoundly revealing. 
They  betray  the  psychological  tone,  the  deep  uncertainties  …  and  the 
striving for something better, plus the fear that nothing would come of it all. 
The major dams against anarchy in these times were the embryo Guild, 
the Bene Gesserit and the Landsraad, which continued its 2,000-year record 
of meeting in spite of the severest obstacles. The Guild’s part appears clear: 
they  gave  free  transport  for  all  Landsraad  and  C.E.T  business.  The  Bene 
Gesserit  role  is  more  obscure.  Certainly,  this  is  the  time  in  which  they 
consolidated their hold upon the sorceresses, explored the subtle narcotics, 
developed  prana-bindu  training  and  conceived  the  Missionaria  Protectiva, 
that  black  arm  of  superstition.  But  it  is  also  the  period  that  saw  the 
composing of the Litany against Fear and the assembly of the Azhar Book, 
that bibliographic marvel that preserves the great secrets of the most ancient 
faiths. 
Ingsley’s comment is perhaps the only one possible: 
“Those were times of deep paradox.” 
For  almost  seven  years,  then,  C.E.T.  labored.  And  as  their  seventh 
anniversary approached, they prepared the human universe for a momentous 
announcement.  On  that  seventh  anniversary,  they  unveiled  the  Orange 
Catholic Bible. 
“Here is a work with dignity and meaning,” they said. “Here is a way to 
make humanity aware of itself as a total creation of God.” 
The men of C.E.T. were likened to archeologists of ideas, inspired by God 
in the grandeur of rediscovery. It was said they had brought to light “the 
vitality of great ideals overlaid by the deposits of centuries,” that they had 
“sharpened the moral imperatives that come out of a religious conscience.” 
With  the  O.C.  Bible,  C.E.T.  presented  the  Liturgical  Manual  and  the 
Commentaries—in many respects a more remarkable work, not only because 
of its brevity (less than half the size of the O.C. Bible), but also because of its 
candor and blend of self-pity and self-righteousness. 
The beginning is an obvious appeal to the agnostic rulers. 
“Men,  ?nding  no  answers  to  the   sunnah   [the  ten  thousand  religious 
questions from the Shari-ah] now apply their own reasoning. All men seek to 
be enlightened. Religion is but the most ancient and honorable way in which 
men have striven to make sense out of God’s universe. Scientists seek the 
lawfulness of events. It is the task of Religion to ?t man into this lawfulness.” 
In their conclusion, though, the Commentaries set a harsh tone that very 
likely foretold their fate. 
“Much  that  was  called  religion  has  carried  an  unconscious  attitude  of 
hostility  toward  life.  True  religion  must  teach  that  life  is  ?lled  with  joys 
pleasing to the eye of God, that knowledge without action is empty. All men 
must see that the teaching of religion by rules and rote is largely a hoax. The 
proper  teaching  is  recognized  with  ease.  You  can  know  it  without  fail 
because  it  awakens  within  you  that  sensation  which  tells  you  this  is 
something you’ve always known.” 
There was an odd sense of calm as the presses and shigawire imprinters 
rolled and the O.C. Bible spread out through the worlds. Some interpreted 
this as a sign from God, an omen of unity. 
But even the C.E.T. delegates betrayed the ?ction of that calm as they 
returned to their respective congregations. Eighteen of them were lynched 
within two months. Fifty-three recanted within the year. 
The  O.C.  Bible  was  denounced  as  a  work  produced  by  “the  hubris  of 
reason.” It was said that its pages were ?lled with a seductive interest in 
logic.  Revisions  that  catered  to  popular  bigotry  began  appearing.  These 
revisions leaned on accepted symbolisms (Cross, Crescent, Feather Rattle, the 
Twelve Saints, the thin Buddha, and the like) and it soon became apparent 
that the ancient superstitions and beliefs had 
 not  been absorbed by the new 
ecumenism. 
Halloway’s  label  for  C.E.T.’s  seven-year  e?ort—“Galactophasic 
Determinism”—was snapped up by eager billions who interpreted the initials 
G.D. as “God-Damned.” 
C.E.T. Chairman Toure Bomoko, a Ulema of the Zensunnis and one of the 
fourteen  delegates  who  never  recanted  (“The  Fourteen  Sages”  of  popular 
history), appeared to admit ?nally that C.E.T. had erred. 
“We shouldn’t have tried to create new symbols,” he said. “We should’ve 
realized we weren’t supposed to introduce uncertainties into accepted belief, 
that  we  weren’t  supposed  to  stir  up  curiosity  about  God.  We  are  daily 
confronted by the terrifying instability of all things human, yet we permit 
our  religions  to  grow  more  rigid  and  controlled,  more  conforming  and 
oppressive. What is this shadow across the highway of Divine Command? It 
is  a  warning  that  institutions  endure,  that  symbols  endure  when  their 
meaning is lost, that there is no summa of all attainable knowledge.” 
The bitter double edge in this “admission” did not escape Bomoko’s critics 
and he was forced soon afterward to ?ee into exile, his life dependent upon 
the  Guild’s  pledge  of  secrecy.  He  reportedly  died  on  Tupile,  honored  and 
beloved, his last words: “Religion must remain an outlet for people who say 
to themselves, ‘I am not the kind of person I want to be.’ It must never sink 
into an assemblage of the self-satis?ed.” 
It is pleasant to think that Bomoko understood the prophecy in his words: 
“Institutions  endure.”  Ninety  generations  later,  the  O.C.  Bible  and  the 
Commentaries permeated the religious universe. 
When  Paul-Muad’Dib  stood  with  his  right  hand  on  the  rock  shrine 
enclosing his father’s skull (the right hand of the blessed, not the left hand of 
the damned) he quoted word for word from “Bomoko’s Legacy”— 
“You who have defeated us say to yourselves that Babylon is fallen and its 
works have been overturned. I say to you still that man remains on trial, 
each man in his own dock. Each man is a little war.” 
The Fremen said of Muad’Dib that he was like Abu Zide whose frigate 
de?ed the Guild and rode one day 
 there  and back.  There  used in this way 
translates directly from the Fremen mythology as the land of the run-spirit, 
the alam al-mithal where all limitations are removed. 
The parallel between this and the Kwisatz Haderach is readily seen. The 
Kwisatz Haderach that the Sisterhood sought through its breeding program 
was interpreted as “The shortening of the way” or “The one who can be two 
places simultaneously.” 
But both of these interpretations can be shown to stem directly from the 
Commentaries: “When law and religious duty are one, your selfdom encloses 
the universe.” 
Of himself, Muad’Dib said: “I am a net in the sea of time, free to sweep 
future and past. I am a moving membrane from whom no possibility can 
escape.” 
These thoughts are all one and the same and they harken to 22 Kalima in 
the O.C. Bible where it says: “Whether a thought is spoken or not it is a real 
thing and has powers of reality.” 
It is when we get into Muad’Dib’s own commentaries in “The Pillars of 
the Universe” as interpreted by his holy men, the Qizara Tafwid, that we see 
his real debt to C.E.T. and Fremen-Zensunni. 
Muad’Dib: “Law and duty are one; so be it. But remember these limitations— 
Thus  are  you  never  fully  self-conscious.  Thus  do  you  remain  immersed  in  the 
communal tau. Thus are you always less than an individual.” 
O.C. Bible: Identical wording. (61 Revelations.) 
Muad’Dib: “Religion often partakes of the myth of progress that shields us from 
the terrors of an uncertain future.” 
C.E.T.  Commentaries:  Identical  wording.  (The  Azhar  Book  traces  this 
statement  to  the  ?rst  century  religious  writer,  Neshou;  through  a 
paraphrase.) 
Muad’Dib: “If a child, an untrained person, an ignorant person, or an insane 
person incites trouble, it is the fault of authority for not predicting and preventing 
that trouble.” 
O.C. Bible: “Any sin can be ascribed, at least in part, to a natural bad 
tendency that is an extenuating circumstance acceptable to God.” (The Azhar 
Book traces this to the ancient Semitic Tawra.) 
Muad’Dib: “Reach forth thy hand and eat what God has provided thee: and 
when thou art replenished, praise the Lord.” 
O.C. Bible: a paraphrase with identical meaning. (The Azhar Book traces 
this in slightly di?erent form to First Islam.) 
Muad’Dib: “Kindness is the beginning of cruelty.” 
Fremen Kitab al-Ibar: “The weight of a kindly God is a fearful thing. Did 
not God give us the burning sun (Al-Lat)? Did not God give us the Mothers of 
Moisture (Reverend Mothers)? Did not God give us Shaitan (Iblis, Satan)? 
From Shaitan did we not get the hurtfulness of speed?” 
(This is the source of the Fremen saying: “Speed comes from Shaitan.” 
Consider:  for  every  one  hundred  calories  of  heat  generated  by  exercise 
[speed] the body evaporates about six ounces of perspiration. The Fremen 
word for perspiration is bakka or tears and, in one pronunciation, translates: 
“The life essence that Shaitan squeezes from your soul.”) 
Muad’Dib’s arrival is called “religiously timely” by Koneywell, but timing 
had little to do with it. As Muad’Dib himself said: “I am here; so ….” 
It is, however, vital to an understanding of Muad’Dib’s religious impact 
that you never lose sight of one fact: the Fremen were a desert people whose 
entire ancestry was accustomed to hostile landscapes. Mysticism isn’t di?cult 
when you survive each second by surmounting open hostility. “You are there 
—so ….” 
With  such  a  tradition,  su?ering  is  accepted—perhaps  as  unconscious 
punishment,  but  accepted.  And  it’s  well  to  note  that  Fremen  ritual  gives 
almost complete freedom from guilt feelings. This isn’t necessarily because 
their law and religion were identical, making disobedience a sin. It’s likely 
closer to the mark to say they cleansed themselves of guilt easily because 
their everyday existence required brutal judgments (often deadly) which in a 
softer land would burden men with unbearable guilt. 
This  is  likely  one  of  the  roots  of  Fremen  emphasis  on  superstition 
(disregarding  the  Missionaria Protectiva’s ministrations).  What  matter  that 
whistling sands are an omen? What matter that you must make the sign of 
the ?st when ?rst you see First Moon? A man’s ?esh is his own and his water 
belongs to the tribe—and the mystery of life isn’t a problem to solve but a 
reality to experience. Omens help you remember this. And because you are 
here , because you have  the  religion, victory cannot evade you in the end. 
As the Bene Gesserit taught for centuries, long before they ran afoul of 
the Fremen: 
“When religion and politics ride the same cart, when that cart is driven by 
a living holy man (baraka), nothing can stand in their path.” 
APPENDIX III 
  
APPENDIX III 
Report on Bene Gesserit Motives and Purposes 
Here  follows  an  excerpt  from  the  Summa  prepared  by  her  own  agents  at  the 
request of the Lady Jessica immediately after the Arrakis A?air. The candor of 
this report ampli?es its value far beyond the ordinary 
. 
Because the Bene Gesserit operated for centuries behind the blind of a semi- 
mystic  school  while  carrying  on  their  selective  breeding  program  among 
humans,  we  tend  to  award  them  with  more  status  than  they  appear  to 
deserve.  Analysis  of  their  “trial  of  fact”  on  the  Arrakis  A?air  betrays  the 
school’s profound ignorance of its own role. 
It may be argued that the Bene Gesserit could examine only such facts as 
were available to them and had no direct access to the person of the Prophet 
Muad’Dib. But the school had surmounted greater obstacles and its error here 
goes deeper. 
The Bene Gesserit program had as its target the breeding of a person they 
labeled “Kwisatz Haderach,” a term signifying “One who can be many places 
at  once.”  In  simpler  terms,  what  they  sought  was  a  human  with  mental 
powers permitting him to understand and use higher order dimensions. 
They were breeding for a super-Mentat, a human computer with some of 
the  prescient  abilities  found  in  Guild  navigators.  Now,  attend  these  facts 
carefully: 
Muad’Dib, born Paul Atreides, was the son of Duke Leto, a man whose 
bloodline had been watched carefully for more than a thousand years. The 
Prophet’s mother, Lady Jessica, was a natural daughter of the Baron Vladimir 
Harkonnen  and  carried  gene-markers  whose  supreme  importance  to  the 
breeding program was known for almost two thousand years. She was a Bene 
Gesserit bred and trained, and 
 should have been a willing tool of the project . 
The Lady Jessica was ordered to produce an Atreides daughter. The plan 
was to inbreed this daughter with Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen, a nephew of the 
Baron Vladimir, with the high probability of a Kwisatz Haderach from that 
union. Instead, for reasons she confesses have never been completely clear to 
her, the concubine Lady Jessica de?ed her orders and bore a son. 
This alone should have alerted the Bene Gesserit to the possibility that a 
wild  variable  had  entered  their  scheme.  But  there  were  other  far  more 
important indications that they virtually ignored: 
1. As a youth, Paul Atreides showed ability to predict the future. He was 
known to have had prescient visions that were accurate, penetrating, and 
de?ed four-dimensional explanation. 
2. The Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, Bene Gesserit Proctor who 
tested  Paul’s  humanity  when  he  was  ?fteen,  deposes  that  he  surmounted 
more agony in the test than any other human of record. Yet she failed to 
make special note of this in her report! 
3.  When  Family  Atreides  moved  to  the  planet  Arrakis,  the  Fremen 
population there hailed the young Paul as a prophet, “the voice from the 
outer world.” The Bene Gesserit were well aware that the rigors of such a 
planet as Arrakis with its totality of desert landscape, its absolute lack of 
open  water,  its  emphasis  on  the  most  primitive  necessities  for  survival, 
inevitably produces a high proportion of sensitives. Yet this Fremen reaction 
and the obvious element of the Arrakeen diet high in spice were glossed over 
by Bene Gesserit observers. 
4. When the Harkonnens and the soldier-fanatics of the Padishah Emperor 
re-occupied  Arrakis,  killing  Paul’s  father  and  most  of  the  Atreides  troops, 
Paul and his mother disappeared. But almost immediately there were reports 
of a new religious leader among the Fremen, a man called Muad’Dib, who 
again  was  hailed  as  “the  voice  from  the  outer  world.”  The  reports  stated 
clearly that he was accompanied by a new Reverend Mother of the Sayyadina 
Rite  “who  is  the  woman  who  bore  him.”  Records  available  to  the  Bene 
Gesserit  stated  in  plain  terms  that  the  Fremen  legends  of  the  Prophet 
contained these words: “He shall be born of a Bene Gesserit witch.” 
(It  may  be  argued  here  that  the  Bene  Gesserit  sent  their  Missionaria 
Protectiva  onto  Arrakis  centuries  earlier  to  implant  something  like  this 
legend as safeguard should any members of the school be trapped there and 
require sanctuary, and that this legend of “the voice from the outer world” 
was  properly  to  be  ignored  because  it  appeared  to  be  the  standard  Bene 
Gesserit  ruse.  But  this  would  be  true  only  if  you  granted  that  the  Bene 
Gesserit were correct in ignoring the other clues about Paul-Muad’Dib.) 
5. When the Arrakis A?air boiled up, the Spacing Guild made overtures to 
the Bene Gesserit. The Guild hinted that its navigators, who use the spice 
drug  on  Arrakis  to  produce  the  limited  prescience  necessary  for  guiding 
spaceships  through  the  void,  were  “bothered  about  the  future”  or  saw 
“problems  on  the  horizon.”  This  could  only  mean  they  saw  a  nexus,  a 
meeting place of countless delicate decisions, beyond which the path was 
hidden from the prescient eye. This was a clear indication that some agency 
was interfering with higher order dimensions! 
(A few of the Bene Gesserit had long been aware that the Guild could not 
interfere directly with the vital spice source because Guild navigators already 
were dealing in their own inept way with higher order dimensions, at least to 
the  point  where  they  recognized  that  the  slightest  misstep  they  made  on 
Arrakis  could  be  catastrophic.  It  was  a  known  fact  that  Guild  navigators 
could predict no way to take control of the spice without producing just such 
a nexus. The obvious conclusion was that someone of higher order powers 
was  taking control of the spice source, yet the Bene Gesserit missed this point 
entirely!) 
In the face of these facts, one is led to the inescapable conclusion that the 
ine?cient  Bene  Gesserit  behavior  in  this  a?air  was  a  product  of  an  even 
higher plan of which they were completely unaware! 
APPENDIX IV 
  
APPENDIX IV 
The Almanak en-Ashraf 
(Selected Excerpts of the Noble Houses) 
SHADDAM IV (10,134—10,202) 
The  Padishah  Emperor,  81st  of  his  line  (House  Corrino)  to  occupy  the  Golden  Lion 
Throne, reigned from 10,156 (date his father, Elrood IX, succumbed to chaumurky) until 
replaced by the 10,196 Regency set up in the name of his eldest daughter, Irulan. His 
reign is noted chie?y for the Arrakis Revolt, blamed by many historians on Shaddam IV’s 
dalliance with Court functions and the pomp of o?ce. The ranks of Bursegs were doubled 
in the ?rst sixteen years of his reign. Appropriations for Sardaukar training went down 
steadily in the ?nal thirty years before the Arrakis Revolt. He had ?ve daughters (Irulan, 
Chalice,  Wensicia,  Josifa,  and  Rugi)  and  no  legal  sons.  Four  of  the  daughters 
accompanied him into retirement. His wife, Anirul, a Bene Gesserit of Hidden Rank, died 
in 10,176. 
LETO ATREIDES (10,140—10,191) 
A dista? cousin of the Corrinos, he is frequently referred to as the Red Duke. House 
Atreides ruled Caladan as a siridar-?ef for twenty generations until pressured into the 
move to Arrakis. He is known chie?y as the father of Duke Paul Muad’Dib, the Umma 
Regent.  The  remains  of  Duke  Leto  occupy  the  “Skull  Tomb”  on  Arrakis.  His  death  is 
attributed  to  the  treachery  of  a  Suk  doctor,  and  is  an  act  laid  to  the  Siridar  Baron, 
Vladimir Harkonnen. 
LADY JESSICA (Hon. Atreides) (10,154—10,256) 
A natural daughter (Bene Gesserit reference) of the Siridar-Baron Vladimir Harkonnen. 
Mother of Duke Paul Muad’Dib. She graduated from the Wallach IX B.G. School. 
LADY ALIA ATREIDES (10,191—) 
Legal daughter of Duke Leto Atreides and his formal concubine, Lady Jessica. Lady Alia 
was born on Arrakis about eight months after Duke Leto’s death. Prenatal exposure to an 
awareness-spectrum narcotic is the reason generally given for Bene Gesserit references to 
her as “Accursed One.” She is known in popular history as St. Alia or St. Alia-of-the-Knife. 
(For a detailed history, see 
 St. Alia, Huntress of a Billion Worlds  by Pander Oulson.) 
VLADIMIR HARKONNEN (10,110—10,193) 
Commonly  referred  to  as  Baron  Harkonnen,  his  title  is  o?cially  Siridar  (planetary 
governor) Baron. Vladimir Harkonnen is the direct-line male descendant of the Bashar 
Abulurd  Harkonnen  who  was  banished  for  cowardice  after  the  Battle  of  Corrin.  The 
return of House Harkonnen to power generally is ascribed to adroit manipulation of the 
whale fur market and later consolidation with melange wealth from Arrakis. The Siridar- 
Baron  died  on  Arrakis  during  the  Revolt.  Title  passed  brie?y  to  the  na-Baron,  Feyd- 
Rautha Harkonnen. 
COUNT HASIMIR FENRING (10,133—10,225) 
A dista? cousin of House Corrino, he was a childhood companion of Shaddam IV. (The 
frequently discredited 
 Pirate History of Corrino  related the curious story that Fenring was 
responsible  for  the  chaumurky  which  disposed  of  Elrood  IX.)  All  accounts  agree  that 
Fenring was the closest friend Shaddam IV possessed. The Imperial chores carried out by 
Count Fenring included that of Imperial Agent on Arrakis during the Harkonnen regime 
there  and  later  Siridar-Absentia  of  Caladan.  He  joined  Shaddam  IV  in  retirement  on 
Salusa Secundus. 
COUNT GLOSSU RABBAN (10,132—10,193) 
Glossu Rabban, Count of Lankiveil, was the eldest nephew of Vladimir Harkonnen. Glossu 
Rabban and Feyd-Rautha Rabban (who took the name Harkonnen when chosen for the 
Siridar-Baron’s household) were legal sons of the Siridir-Baron’s youngest demibrother, 
Abulurd. Abulurd renounced the Harkonnen name and all rights to the title when given 
the subdistrict governorship of Rabban-Lankiveil. Rabban was a dista? name. 
TERMINOLOGY OF THE 
IMPERIUM 
  
TERMINOLOGY OF THE IMPERIUM 
In studying the Imperium, Arrakis, and the whole culture which produced 
Muad’Dib,  many  unfamiliar  terms  occur.  To  increase  understanding  is  a 
laudable goal, hence the de?nitions and explanations given below. 
ABA: 
 loose robe worn by Fremen women; usually black. 
ACH: 
 left turn: a worm steersman’s call. 
ADAB: 
 the demanding memory that comes upon you of itself. 
AKARSO: 
 a plant native to Sikun (of 70 Ophiuchi A) characterized by almost 
oblong leaves. Its green and white stripes indicate the constant multiple 
condition of parallel active and dormant chlorophyll regions. 
ALAM  AL-MITHAL: 
  the  mystical  world  of  similitudes  where  all  physical 
limitations are removed. 
AL-LAT: 
 mankind’s original sun; by usage: any planet’s primary. 
AMPOLIROS: 
 the legendary “Flying Dutchman” of space. 
AMTAL 
 or 
 AMTAL RULE: 
 a common rule on primitive worlds under which 
something is tested to determine its limits or defects. Commonly: testing to 
destruction. 
AQL: 
 the test of reason. Originally, the “Seven Mystic Questions” beginning: 
“Who is it that thinks?” 
ARRAKEEN: 
  ?rst  settlement  on  Arrakis;  long-time  seat  of  planetary 
government. 
ARRAKIS: 
 the planet known as Dune; third planet of Canopus. 
ASSASSINS’ HANDBOOK: 
 Third-century compilation of poisons commonly 
used in a War of Assassins. Later expanded to include those deadly devices 
permitted under the Guild Peace and Great Convention. 
AULIYA: 
 In the Zensunni Wanderers’ religion, the female at the left hand of 
God; God’s handmaiden. 
AUMAS: 
 poison administered in food. (Speci?cally: poison in solid food.) In 
some dialects: Chaumas. 
AYAT: 
 the signs of life. ( See  Burhan.) 
BAKKA: 
 in Fremen legend, the weeper who mourns for all mankind. 
BAKLAWA: 
 a heavy pastry made with date syrup. 
BALISET: 
 a nine-stringed musical instrument, lineal descendant of the zithra, 
tuned to the Chusuk scale and played by strumming. Favorite instrument 
of Imperial troubadours. 
BARADYE PISTOL: 
 a static-charge dust gun developed on Arrakis for laying 
down a large dye marker area on sand. 
BARAKA: 
 a living holy man of magical powers. 
BASHAR 
  (often  Colonel  Bashar):  an  o?cer  of  the  Sardaukar  a  fractional 
point  above  Colonel  in  the  standardized  military  classi?cation.  Rank 
created for military ruler of a planetary subdistrict. (Bashar of the Corps is 
a title reserved strictly for military use.) 
BATTLE  LANGUAGE: 
  any  special  language  of  restricted  etymology 
developed for clear-speech communication in warfare. 
BEDWINE: 
 see  Ichwan Bedwine. 
BELA  TEGEUSE: 
  ?fth  planet  of  Kuentsing:  third  stopping  place  of  the 
Zensunni (Fremen) forced migration. 
BENE  GESSERIT: 
  the  ancient  school  of  mental  and  physical  training 
established  primarily  for  female  students  after  the  Butlerian  Jihad 
destroyed the so-called “thinking machines” and robots. 
B.G.: 
 idiomatic for Bene Gesserit except when used with a date. With a date 
it signi?es Before Guild and identi?es the Imperial dating system based on 
the genesis of the Spacing Guild’s monopoly. 
BHOTANI JIB: 
 see  Chakobsa. 
BI-LA KAIFA: 
 Amen. (Literally: “Nothing further need be explained.”) 
BINDU: 
 relating to the human nervous system, especially to nerve training. 
Often expressed as Bindu-nervature. ( 
See  Prana.) 
BINDU SUSPENSION: 
 a special form of catalepsis, self-induced. 
BLED: 
 ?at, open desert. 
BOURKA: 
 insulated mantle worn by Fremen in the open desert. 
BURHAN: 
 the proofs of life. (Commonly: the ayat and burhan of life.  See 
Ayat.) 
BURSEG: 
 a commanding general of the Sardaukar. 
BUTLERIAN JIHAD: 
 see  Jihad, Butlerian ( also  Great Revolt). 
CAID: 
 Sardaukar o?cer rank given to a military o?cial whose duties call 
mostly  for  dealings  with  civilians;  a  military  governorship  over  a  full 
planetary district; above the rank of Bashar but not equal to Burseg. 
CALADAN: 
 third planet of Delta Pavonis; birthworld of Paul-Muad’Dib. 
CANTO  and  RESPONDU: 
  an  invocation  rite,  part  of  the  panoplia 
propheticus of the Missionaria Protectiva. 
CARRYALL: 
  a  ?ying  wing  (commonly  “wing”),  the  aerial  workhorse  of 
Arrakis,  used  to  transport  large  spice  mining,  hunting,  and  re?ning 
equipment. 
CATCHPOCKET: 
  any  stillsuit  pocket  where  ?ltered  water  is  caught  and 
stored. 
CHAKOBSA: 
  the  so-called  “magnetic  language”  derived  in  part  from  the 
ancient Bhotani (Bhotani Jib—jib meaning dialect). A collection of ancient 
dialects modi?ed by needs of secrecy, but chie?y the hunting language of 
the Bhotani, the hired assassins of the ?rst Wars of Assassins. 
CHAUMAS 
 (Aumas in some dialects): poison in solid food as distinguished 
from poison administered in some other way. 
CHAUMURKY 
 (Musky or Murky in some dialects): poison administered in a 
drink. 
CHEOPS: 
 pyramid chess; nine-level chess with double object of putting your 
queen at the apex and the opponent’s king in check. 
CHEREM: 
 a brotherhood of hate (usually for revenge). 
CHOAM: 
  acronym  for  Combine  Honnete  Ober  Advancer  Mercantiles—the 
universal development corporation controlled by the Emperor and Great 
Houses with the Guild and Bene Gesserit as silent partners. 
CHUSUK: 
 fourth planet of Theta Shalish; the so-called “Music Planet” noted 
for the quality of its musical instruments. ( 
See  Varota.) 
CIELAGO: 
  any  modi?ed   Chiroptera   of  Arrakis  adapted  to  carry  distrans 
messages. 
CONE OF SILENCE: 
 the ?eld of a distorter that limits the carrying power of 
the voice or any other vibrator by damping the vibrations with an image- 
vibration 180 degrees out of phase. 
CORIOLIS STORM: 
 any major sandstorm on Arrakis where winds across the 
open ?atlands are ampli?ed by the planet’s own revolutionary motion to 
reach speeds up to 700 kilometers per hour. 
CORRIN,  BATTLE  OF: 
  the  space  battle  from  which  the  Imperial  House 
Corrino took its name. The battle fought near Sigma Draconis in the year 
88 B.G. settled the ascendancy of the ruling House from Salusa Secundus. 
COUSINES: 
 blood relations beyond cousins. 
CRUSHERS: 
  military  space  vessels  composed  of  smaller  vessels  locked 
together and designed to fall on an enemy position, crushing it. 
CUTTERAY: 
 short-range version of lasgun used mostly as a cutting tool and 
surgeon’s scalpel. 
CRYSKNIFE: 
 the sacred knife of the Fremen on Arrakis. It is manufactured in 
two  forms  from  teeth  taken  from  dead  sandworms.  The  two  forms  are 
“?xed”  and  “un?xed.”  An  un?xed  knife  requires  proximity  to  a  human 
body’s electrical ?eld to prevent disintegration. Fixed knives are treated for 
storage. All are about 20 centimeters long. 
DAR AL-HIKMAN: 
 school of religious translation or interpretation. 
DARK  THINGS: 
  idiomatic  for  the  infectious  superstitions  taught  by  the 
Missionaria Protectiva to susceptible civilizations. 
DEATH  TRIPOD: 
  originally,  the  tripod  upon  which  desert  executioners 
hanged their victims. By usage: the three members of a Cherem sworn to 
the same revenge. 
DERCH: 
 right turn, a worm steersman’s call. 
DEW COLLECTORS 
 or 
 DEW PRECIPITATORS: 
 not to be confused with dew 
gatherers.  Collectors  or  precipitators  are  egg-shaped  devices  about  four 
centimeters on the long axis. They are made of chromoplastic that turns a 
re?ecting white when subjected to light, and reverts to transparency in 
darkness. The collector forms a markedly cold surface upon which dawn 
dew will precipitate. They are used by Fremen to line concave planting 
depressions where they provide a small but reliable source of water. 
DEW GATHERERS: 
 workers who reap dew from the plants of Arrakis, using 
a scythelike dew reaper. 
DEMIBROTHERS: 
 sons of concubines in the same household and certi?ed as 
having the same father. 
DICTUM FAMILIA: 
 that rule of the Great Convention which prohibits the 
slaying  of  a  royal  person  or  member  of  a  Great  House  by  informal 
treachery.  The  rule  sets  up  the  formal  outline  and  limits  the  means  of 
assassination. 
DISTRANS: 
  a  device  for  producing  a  temporary  neural  imprint  on  the 
nervous  system  of 
  Chiroptera   or  birds.  The  creature’s  normal  cry  then 
carries the message imprint which can be sorted from that carrier wave by 
another distrans. 
DRUM SAND: 
 impaction of sand in such a way that any sudden blow against 
its surface produces a distinct drum sound. 
DOORSEAL: 
 a portable plastic hermetic seal used for moisture security in 
Fremen overday cave camps. 
DUMP BOXES: 
 the general term for any cargo container of irregular shape 
and equipped with ablation surfaces and suspensor damping system. They 
are used to dump material from space onto a planet’s surface. 
DUNE MEN: 
 idiomatic for open sand workers, spice hunters and the like on 
Arrakis. Sandworkers. Spiceworkers. 
DUST CHASM: 
 any deep crevasse or depression on the desert of Arrakis that 
has been ?lled with dust not apparently di?erent from the surrounding 
surface;  a  deadly  trap  because  human  or  animal  will  sink  in  it  and 
smother. ( 
See  Tidal Dust Basin.) 
ECAZ: 
 fourth planet of Alpha Centauri B; the sculptors’ paradise, so called 
because  it  is  the  home  of 
  fogwood ,  the  plant  growth  capable  of  being 
shaped in situ solely by the power of human thought. 
EGO-LIKENESS: 
 portraiture reproduced through a shigawire projector that is 
capable of reproducing subtle movements said to convey the ego essence. 
ELACCA DRUG: 
 narcotic formed by burning blood-grained elacca wood of 
Ecaz. Its e?ect is to remove most of the will to self-preservation. Druggee 
skin shows a characteristic carrot color. Commonly used to prepare slave 
gladiators for the ring. 
EL-SAYAL: 
  the  “rain  of  sand.”  A  fall  of  dust  which  has  been  carried  to 
medium  altitude  (around  2,000  meters)  by  a  coriolis  storm.  El-sayals 
frequently bring moisture to ground level. 
ERG: 
 an extensive dune area, a sea of sand. 
FAI: 
 the water tribute, chief specie of tax on Arrakis. 
FANMETAL: 
  metal  formed  by  the  growing  of  jasmium  crystals  in 
duraluminum; noted for extreme tensile strength in relationship to weight. 
Name  derives  from  its  common  use  in  collapsible  structures  that  are 
opened by “fanning” them out. 
FAUFRELUCHES: 
  the  rigid  rule  of  class  distinction  enforced  by  the 
Imperium. “A place for every man and every man in his place.” 
FEDAYKIN: 
  Fremen  death  commandos;  historically:  a  group  formed  and 
pledged to give their lives to right a wrong. 
FILMBOOK: 
  any  shigawire  imprint  used  in  training  and  carrying  a 
mnemonic pulse. 
FILT-PLUG: 
 a nose ?lter unit worn with a stillsuit to capture moisture from 
the exhaled breath. 
FIQH: 
  knowledge,  religious  law;  one  of  the  half-legendary  origins  of  the 
Zensunni Wanderers’ religion. 
FIRE, PILLAR OF: 
 a simple pyrocket for signaling across the open desert. 
FIRST MOON: 
 the major satellite of Arrakis, ?rst to rise in the night; notable 
for a distinct human ?st pattern on its surface. 
FREE TRADERS: 
 idiomatic for smugglers. 
FREMEN: 
 the free tribes of Arrakis, dwellers in the desert, remnants of the 
Zensunni Wanderers. (“Sand Pirates” according to the Imperial Dictionary.) 
FREMKIT: 
 desert survival kit of Fremen manufacture. 
FRIGATE: 
 largest spaceship that can be grounded on a planet and taken o? 
in one piece. 
GALACH: 
 o?cial language of the Imperium. Hybrid Inglo-Slavic with strong 
traces  of  cultural-specialization  terms  adopted  during  the  long  chain  of 
human migrations. 
GAMONT: 
 third planet of Niushe; noted for its hedonistic culture and exotic 
sexual practices. 
GARE: 
 butte. 
GATHERING: 
  distinguished  from  Council  Gathering.  It  is  a  formal 
convocation of Fremen leaders to witness a combat that determines tribal 
leadership.  (A  Council  Gathering  is  an  assembly  to  arrive  at  decisions 
involving all the tribes.) 
GEYRAT: 
 straight ahead; a worm steersman’s call. 
GHAFLA: 
 giving oneself up to gad?y distractions. Thus: a changeable person, 
one not to be trusted. 
GHANIMA: 
  something  acquired  in  battle  or  single  combat.  Commonly,  a 
memento of combat kept only to stir the memory. 
GIEDI  PRIME: 
  the  planet  of  Ophiuchi  B  (36),  homeworld  of  House 
Harkonnen.  A  median-viable  planet  with  a  low  active-photosynthesis 
range. 
GINAZ,  HOUSE  OF: 
  one-time  allies  of  Duke  Leto  Atreides.  They  were 
defeated in the War of Assassins with Grumman. 
GIUDICHAR: 
  a  holy  truth.  (Commonly  seen  in  the  expression  Giudichar 
mantene: an original and supporting truth.) 
GLOWGLOBE: 
 suspensor-buoyed illuminating device, self-powered (usually 
by melange spice mass; a device of the second stage in spice re?ning. 
GRABEN: 
 a long geological ditch formed when the ground sinks because of 
movements in the underlying crustal layers. 
GREAT  CONVENTION: 
  the  universal  truce  enforced  under  the  power 
balance maintained by the Guild, the Great Houses, and the Imperium. Its 
chief rule prohibits the use of atomic weapons against human targets. Each 
rule of the Great Convention begins: “The forms must be obeyed ….” 
GREAT  MOTHER: 
  the  horned  goddess,  the  feminine  principle  of  space 
(commonly: Mother Space), the feminine face of the male-female-neuter 
trinity accepted as Supreme Being by many religions within the Imperium. 
GREAT  REVOLT: 
  common  term  for  the  Butlerian  Jihad.  ( See   Jihad, 
Butlerian.) 
GRIDEX PLANE: 
 a di?erential-charge separator used to remove sand from 
the melange spice mass; a device of the second stage in spice re?ning. 
GRUMMAN: 
 second planet of Niushe, noted chie?y for the feud of its ruling 
House (Moritani) with House Ginaz. 
GOMJABBAR: 
  the  high-handed  enemy;  that  speci?c  poison  needle  tipped 
with meta-cyanide used by Bene Gesserit Proctors in the death-alternative 
test of human awareness. 
GUILD: 
 the Spacing Guild, one leg of the political tripod maintaining the 
Great  Convention.  The  Guild  was  the  second  mental-physical  training 
school ( see  Bene Gesserit) after the Butlerian Jihad. The Guild monopoly 
on space travel and transport and upon international banking is taken as 
the beginning point of the Imperial Calendar. 
HAGAL: 
 the “Jewel Planet” (II Theta Shaowei), mined out in the time of 
Shaddam I. 
HAIIIII-YOH!: 
 command to action; worm steersman’s call. 
HAJJ: 
 holy journey. 
HAJR: 
 desert journey, migration. 
HAJRA: 
 journey of seeking. 
HAL YAWM: 
 “Now! At Last!” a Fremen exclamation. 
HARMONTHEP: 
 Ingsley gives this as the planet name for the sixth stop in 
the Zensunni migration. It is supposed to have been a no longer existent 
satellite of Delta Pavonis. 
HARVESTER 
 or 
 HARVESTER FACTORY: 
 a large (often 120 meters by 40 
meters)  spice  mining  machine  commonly  employed  on  rich, 
uncontaminated  melange  blows.  (Often  called  a  “crawler”  because  of 
buglike body on independent tracks.) 
HEIGHLINER: 
  major  cargo  carrier  of  the  Spacing  Guild’s  transportation 
system. 
HIEREG: 
 temporary Fremen desert camp on open sand. 
HIGH COUNCIL: 
 the Landsraad inner circle empowered to act as supreme 
tribunal in House to House disputes. 
HOLTZMAN EFFECT: 
 the negative repelling e?ect of a shield generator. 
HOOKMAN: 
 Fremen with Maker hooks prepared to catch a sandworm. 
HOUSE: 
 idiomatic for Ruling Clan of a planet or planetary system. 
HOUSES  MAJOR: 
  holders  of  planetary  ?efs;  interplanetary  entrepreneurs. 
( 
See  House  above .) 
HOUSES MINOR: 
 planet-bound entrepreneur class (Galach: “Richece”). 
HUNTER-SEEKER: 
 a ravening sliver of suspensor-buoyed metal guided as a 
weapon by a nearby control console; common assassination device. 
IBAD, EYES OF: 
 characteristic e?ect of a diet high in melange wherein the 
whites and pupils of the eyes turn a deep blue (indicative of deep melange 
addiction). 
IBN QIRTAIBA: 
 “Thus go the holy words ….” Formal beginning to Fremen 
religious incantation (derived from panoplia propheticus). 
ICHWAN BEDWINE: 
 the brotherhood of all Fremen on Arrakis. 
IJAZ: 
  prophecy  that  by  its  very  nature  cannot  be  denied;  immutable 
prophecy. 
IKHUT-EIGH!: 
 cry of the water-seller on Arrakis (etymology uncertain).  See 
Soo-Soo Sook! 
ILM: 
 theology; science of religious tradition; one of the half-legendary origins 
of the Zensunni Wanderers’ faith. 
IMPERIAL CONDITIONING: 
 a development of the Suk Medical Schools: the 
highest conditioning against taking human life. Initiates are marked by a 
diamond tattoo on the forehead and are permitted to wear their hair long 
and bound by a silver Suk ring. 
INKVINE: 
 a creeping plant native to Giedi Prime and frequently used as a 
whip in the slave cribs. Victims are marked by beet-colored tattoos that 
cause residual pain for many years. 
ISTISLAH: 
 a rule of the general welfare; usually a preface to brutal necessity. 
IX: 
 see  Richese. 
JIHAD: 
 a religious crusade; fanatical crusade. 
JIHAD, BUTLERIAN: 
 ( see also  Great Revolt)—the crusade against computers, 
thinking machines, and conscious robots begun in 201 B.G. and concluded 
in 108 B.G. Its chief commandment remains in the O.C. Bible as “Thou 
shalt not make a machine in the likeness of a human mind.” 
JUBBA  CLOAK: 
  the  all-purpose  cloak  (it  can  be  set  to  re?ect  or  admit 
radiant heat, converts to a hammock or shelter) commonly worn over a 
stillsuit on Arrakis. 
JUDGE  OF  THE  CHANGE: 
  an  o?cial  appointed  by  the  Landsraad  High 
Council and the Emperor to monitor a change of ?ef, a kanly negotiation, 
or formal battle in a War of Assassins. The Judge’s arbitral authority may 
be challenged only before the High Council with the Emperor present. 
KANLY: 
 formal feud or vendetta under the rules of the Great Convention 
carried on according to the strictest limitations. ( 
See  Judge of the Change.) 
Originally the rules were designed to protect innocent bystanders. 
KARAMA: 
 a miracle; an action initiated by the spirit world. 
KHALA: 
  traditional  invocation  to  still  the  angry  spirits  of  a  place  whose 
name you mention. 
KINDJAL: 
  double-bladed  short  sword  (or  long  knife)  with  about  20 
centimeters of slightly curved blade. 
KISWA: 
 any ?gure or design from Fremen mythology. 
KITAB  AL-IBAR: 
  the  combined  survival  handbook/religious  manual 
developed by the Fremen on Arrakis. 
KRIMSKELL  FIBER 
  or 
  KRIMSKELL  ROPE: 
  the  “claw  ?ber”  woven  from 
strands  of  the 
  hufuf   vine  from  Ecaz.  Knots  tied  in  krimskell  will  claw 
tighter and tighter to preset limits when the knot-lines are pulled. (For a 
more  detailed  study, 
  see   Holjance  Vohnbrook’s  “The  Strange  Vines  of 
Ecaz.”) 
KULL WAHAD!: 
 “I am profoundly stirred!” A sincere exclamation of surprise 
common in the Imperium. Strict interpretation depends on context. (It is 
said of Muad’Dib that once he watched a desert hawk chick emerge from 
its shell and whispered: “Kull wahad!”) 
KULON: 
 wild ass of Terra’s Asiatic steppes adapted for Arrakis. 
KWISATZ HADERACH: 
 “Shortening of the Way.” This is the label applied by 
the Bene Gesserit to the 
 unknown  for which they sought a genetic solution: 
a male Bene Gesserit whose organic mental powers would bridge space and 
time. 
LA, LA, LA: 
 Fremen cry of grief. (La translates as ultimate denial, a “no” 
from which you cannot appeal.) 
LASGUN: 
 continuous-wave laser projector. Its use as a weapon is limited in a 
?eld-generator-shield  culture  because  of  the  explosive  pyrotechnics 
(technically, subatomic fusion) created when its beam intersects a shield. 
LEGION, IMPERIAL: 
 ten brigades (about 30,000 men). 
LIBAN: 
 Fremen liban is spice water infused with yucca ?our. Originally a 
sour milk drink. 
LISAN AL-GAIB: 
 “The Voice from the Outer World.” In Fremen messianic 
legends, an o?-world prophet. Sometimes translated as “Giver of Water.” 
( 
See  Mahdi.) 
LITERJON: 
 a one-liter container for transporting water on Arrakis; made of 
high-density, shatterproof plastic with positive seal. 
LITTLE MAKER: 
 the half-plant-half-animal deep-sand vector of the Arrakis 
sand-worm. The Little Maker’s excretions form the pre-spice mass. 
MAHDI: 
 in the Fremen messianic legend, “The One Who Will Lead Us to 
Paradise.” 
MAKER: 
 see  Shai-hulud. 
MAKER  HOOKS: 
  the  hooks  used  for  capturing,  mounting,  and  steering  a 
sandworm of Arrakis. 
MANTENE: 
  underlying  wisdom,  supporting  argument,  ?rst  principle.  ( See 
Giudichar.) 
MATING  INDEX: 
  the  Bene  Gesserit  master  record  of  its  human  breeding 
program aimed at producing the Kwisatz Haderach. 
MAULA: 
 slave. 
MAULA PISTOL: 
 spring-loaded gun for ?ring poison darts; range about forty 
meters. 
MELANGE: 
 the “spice of spices,” the crop for which Arrakis is the unique 
source.  The  spice,  chie?y  noted  for  its  geriatric  qualities,  is  mildly 
addictive when taken in small quantities, severely addictive when imbibed 
in quantities above two grams daily per seventy kilos of body weight. ( 
See 
Ibad, Water of Life,  and  Pre-Spice Mass.) Muad’Dib claimed the spice as a 
key to his prophetic powers. Guild navigators make similar claims. Its price 
on  the  Imperial  market  has  ranged  as  high  as  620,000  solaris  the 
decagram. 
MENTAT: 
  that  class  of  Imperial  citizens  trained  for  supreme 
accomplishments of logic. “Human computers.” 
METAGLASS: 
 glass grown as a high-temperature gas infusion in sheets of 
jasmium quartz. Noted for extreme tensile strength (about 450,000 kilos 
per  square  centimeter  at  two  centimeters’  thickness)  and  capacity  as  a 
selective radiation ?lter. 
MIHNA: 
  the  season  for  testing  Fremen  youths  who  wish  admittance  to 
manhood. 
MINIMIC  FILM: 
  shigawire  of  one-micron  diameter  often  used  to  transmit 
espionage and counterespionage data. 
MISH-MISH: 
 apricots. 
MISR: 
 the historical Zensunni (Fremen) term for themselves: “The People.” 
MISSIONARIA PROTECTIVA: 
 the arm of the Bene Gesserit order charged 
with  sowing  infectious  superstitions  on  primitive  worlds,  thus  opening 
those  regions  to  exploitation  by  the  Bene  Gesserit.  ( See   Panoplia 
propheticus.) 
MONITOR: 
 a ten-section space warcraft mounting heavy armor and shield 
protection. It is designed to be separated into its component sections for 
lift-o? after planet-fall. 
MUAD’DIB: 
 the adapted kangaroo mouse of Arrakis, a creature associated in 
the  Fremen  earth-spirit  mythology  with  a  design  visible  on  the  planet’s 
second moon. This creature is admired by Fremen for its ability to survive 
in the open desert. 
MUDIR  NAHYA: 
  the  Fremen  name  for  Beast  Rabban  (Count  Rabban  of 
Lankiveil), the Harkonnen cousin who was siridar governor on Arrakis for 
many years. The name is often translated as “Demon Ruler.” 
MUSHTAMAL: 
 a small garden annex or garden courtyard. 
MUSKY: 
 poison in a drink. ( See  Chaumurky.) 
MU ZEIN WALLAH!: 
 Mu zein literally means “nothing good,” and wallah is a 
re?exive terminal exclamation. In this traditional opening for a Fremen 
curse against an enemy, Wallah turns the emphasis back upon the words 
Mu  zein,  producing  the  meaning:  “Nothing  good,  never  good,  good  for 
nothing.” 
NA-: 
 a pre?x meaning “nominated” or “next in line.” Thus: na-Baron means 
heir apparent to a barony. 
NAIB: 
 one who has sworn never to be taken alive by the enemy; traditional 
oath of a Fremen leader. 
NEZHONI SCARF: 
 the scarf-pad worn at the forehead beneath the stillsuit 
hood by married or “associated” Fremen women after birth of a son. 
NOUKKERS: 
  o?cers  of  the  Imperial  bodyguard  who  are  related  to  the 
Emperor by blood. Traditional rank for sons of royal concubines. 
OIL LENS: 
 hufuf oil held in static tension by an enclosing force ?eld within a 
viewing tube as part of a magnifying or other light-manipulation system. 
Because each lens element can be adjusted individually one micron at a 
time, the oil lens is considered the ultimate in accuracy for manipulating 
visible light. 
OPAFIRE: 
 one of the rare opaline jewels of Hagal. 
ORANGE  CATHOLIC  BIBLE: 
  the  “Accumulated  Book,”  the  religious  text 
produced  by  the  Commission  of  Ecumenical  Translators.  It  contains 
elements  of  most  ancient  religions,  including  the  Maometh  Sarri, 
Mahayana Christianity, Zensunni Catholicism and Buddislamic traditions. 
Its supreme commandment is considered to be: “Thou shalt not dis?gure 
the soul.” 
ORNITHOPTER: 
  (commonly:  ’thopter):  any  aircraft  capable  of  sustained 
wing-beat ?ight in the manner of birds. 
OUT-FREYN: 
  Galach  for  “immediately  foreign,”  that  is:  not  of  your 
immediate community, not of the select. 
PALM LOCK: 
 any lock or seal which may be opened on contact with the 
palm of the human hand to which it has been keyed. 
PAN: 
 on Arrakis, any low-lying region or depression created by the subsiding 
of the underlying basement complex. (On planets with su?cient water, a 
pan indicates a region once covered by open water. Arrakis is believed to 
have at least one such area, although this remains open to argument.) 
PANOPLIA PROPHETICUS: 
 term covering the infectious superstitions used 
by  the  Bene  Gesserit  to  exploit  primitive  regions.  ( 
See   Missionaria 
Protectiva.) 
PARACOMPASS: 
 any compass that determines direction by local magnetic 
anomaly; used where relevant charts are available and where a planet’s 
total magnetic ?eld is unstable or subject to masking by severe magnetic 
storms. 
PENTASHIELD: 
  a  ?ve-layer  shield-generator  ?eld  suitable  for  small  areas 
such  as  doorways  or  passages  (large  reinforcing  shields  become 
increasingly unstable with each successive layer) and virtually impassable 
to  anyone  not  wearing  a  dissembler  tuned  to  the  shield  codes.  ( 
See 
Prudence Door.) 
PLASTEEL: 
 steel which has been stabilized with stravidium ?bers grown into 
its crystal structure. 
PLENISCENTA: 
 an exotic green bloom of Ecaz noted for its sweet aroma. 
POLING THE SAND: 
 the art of placing plastic and ?ber poles in the open 
desert wastes of Arrakis and reading the patterns etched on the poles by 
sandstorms as a clue to weather prediction. 
PORITRIN: 
 third planet of Epsilon Alangue, considered by many Zensunni 
Wanderers as their planet of origin, although clues in their language and 
mythology show far more ancient planetary roots. 
PORTYGULS: 
 oranges. 
PRANA: 
 (Prana-musculature): the body’s muscles when considered as units 
for ultimate training. ( 
See  Bindu.) 
PRE-SPICE MASS: 
 the stage of fungusoid wild growth achieved when water 
is ?ooded into the excretions of Little Makers. At this stage, the spice of 
Arrakis forms a characteristic “blow,” exchanging the material from deep 
underground  for  the  matter  on  the  surface  above  it.  This  mass,  after 
exposure to sun and air, becomes melange ( See also  Melange  and  Water of 
Life.) 
PROCES  VERBAL: 
  a  semiformal  report  alleging  a  crime  against  the 
Imperium. Legally: an action falling between a loose verbal allegation and 
a formal charge of crime. 
PROCTOR  SUPERIOR: 
  a  Bene  Gesserit  Reverend  Mother  who  is  also 
regional  director  of  a  B.G.  school.  (Commonly:  Bene  Gesserit  with  the 
Sight.) 
PRUDENCE  DOOR 
  or 
  PRUDENCE  BARRIER 
  (idiomatically:  pru-door  or 
prubarrier):  any  pentashield  situated  for  the  escape  of  selected  persons 
under conditions of pursuit. ( 
See  Pentashield.) 
PUNDI RICE: 
 a mutated rice whose grains, high in natural sugar, achieve 
lengths up to four centimeters; chief export of Caladan. 
PYONS: 
 planet-bound peasants or laborers, one of the base classes under the 
Faufreluches. Legally: wards of the planet. 
PYRETIC CONSCIENCE: 
 so-called “conscience of ?re;” that inhibitory level 
touched by Imperial conditioning. ( 
See  Imperial conditioning.) 
QANAT: 
  an  open  canal  for  carrying  irrigation  water  under  controlled 
conditions through a desert. 
QIRTAIBA: 
 see  Ibn Qirtaiba. 
QUIZARA TAFWID: 
 Fremen priests (after Muad’Dib). 
RACHAG: 
 a ca?eine-type stimulant from the yellow berries of akarso. ( See 
Akarso.) 
RAMADHAN: 
  ancient  religious  period  marked  by  fasting  and  prayer; 
traditionally, the ninth month of the solar-lunar calendar. Fremen mark the 
observance  according  to  the  ninth  meridian-crossing  cycle  of  the  ?rst 
moon. 
RAZZIA: 
 a semipiratical guerrilla raid. 
RECATHS: 
 body-function tubes linking the human waste disposal system to 
the cycling ?lters of a stillsuit. 
REPKIT: 
 repair and replacement essentials for a stillsuit. 
RESIDUAL POISON: 
 an innovation attributed to the Mentat Piter de Vries 
whereby  the  body  is  impregnated  with  a  substance  for  which  repeated 
antidotes must be administered. Withdrawal of the antidote at any time 
brings death. 
REVEREND MOTHER: 
 originally, a proctor of the Bene Gesserit, one who 
has transformed an “illuminating poison” within her body, raising herself 
to  a  higher  state  of  awareness.  Title  adopted  by  Fremen  for  their  own 
religious leaders who accomplished a similar “illumination.” ( 
See also  Bene 
Gesserit 
 and  Water of Life.) 
RICHESE: 
 fourth planet of Eridani A, classed with Ix as supreme in machine 
culture. Noted for miniaturization. (For a detailed study of how Richese 
and Ix escaped the more severe e?ects of the Butlerian Jihad,  see The Last 
Jihad 
 by Sumer and Kautman.) 
RIMWALL: 
 second upper step of the protecting blu?s on the Shield Wall of 
Arrakis. ( 
See  Shield Wall.) 
RUH-SPIRIT: 
 in Fremen belief, that part of the individual which is always 
rooted in (and capable of sensing) the metaphysical world. ( 
See  Alam al- 
Mithal.) 
SADUS: 
 judges. The Fremen title refers to holy judges, equivalent to saints. 
SALUSA SECUNDUS: 
 third planet of Gamma Waiping; designated Imperial 
Prison Planet after removal of the Royal Court to Kaitan. Salusa Secundus 
is  homeworld  of  House  Corrino,  and  the  second  stopping  point  in 
migrations of the Wandering Zensunni. Fremen tradition says they were 
slaves on S.S. for nine generations. 
SANDCRAWLER: 
  general  term  for  machinery  designed  to  operate  on  the 
Arrakis surface in hunting and collecting melange. 
SANDMASTER: 
 general superintendent of spice operations. 
SANDRIDER: 
 Fremen term for one who is capable of capturing and riding a 
sandworm. 
SANDSNORK: 
 breathing device for pumping surface air into a sandcovered 
stilltent. 
SANDTIDE: 
 idiomatic for a dust tide: the variation in level within certain 
dust-?lled  basins  on  Arrakis  due  to  gravitational  e?ects  of  sun  and 
satellites. ( See  Tidal Dust Basin.) 
SANDWALKER: 
 any Fremen trained to survive in the open desert. 
SANDWORM: 
 See  Shai-Hulud. 
SAPHO: 
 high-energy liquid extracted from barrier roots of Ecaz. Commonly 
used by Mentats who claim it ampli?es mental powers. Users develop deep 
ruby stains on mouth and lips. 
SARDAUKAR: 
 the soldier-fanatics of the Padishah Emperor. They were men 
from an environmental background of such ferocity that it killed six out of 
thirteen  persons  before  the  age  of  eleven.  Their  military  training 
emphasized ruthlessness and a near-suicidal disregard for personal safety. 
They  were  taught  from  infancy  to  use  cruelty  as  a  standard  weapon, 
weakening opponents with terror. At the apex of their sway over the a?airs 
of the Universe, their swordsmanship was said to match that of the Ginaz 
tenth  level  and  their  cunning  abilities  at  in-?ghting  were  reputed  to 
approach those of a Bene Gesserit adept. Any one of them was rated a 
match for any ten ordinary Landsraad military conscripts. By the time of 
Shaddam  IV,  while  they  were  still  formidable,  their  strength  had  been 
sapped  by  overcon?dence,  and  the  sustaining  mystique  of  their  warrior 
religion had been deeply undermined by cynicism. 
SARFA: 
 the act of turning away from God. 
SAYYADINA: 
 feminine acolyte in the Fremen religious hierarchy. 
SCHLAG: 
 animal native to Tupile once hunted almost to extinction for its 
thin, tough hide. 
SECOND MOON: 
 the smaller of the two satellites of Arrakis, noteworthy for 
the kangaroo mouse ?gure in its surface markings. 
SELAMLIK: 
 Imperial audience chamber. 
SEMUTA: 
 the second narcotic derivative (by crystal extraction) from burned 
residue  of  elacca  wood.  The  e?ect  (described  as  timeless,  sustained 
ecstasy) is elicited by certain atonal vibrations referred to as semuta music. 
SERVOK: 
 clock-set mechanism to perform simple tasks; one of the limited 
“automatic” devices permitted after the Butlerian Jihad. 
SHAH-NAMA: 
 the half-legendary First Book of the Zensunni Wanderers. 
SHAI-HULUD: 
  Sandworm  of  Arrakis,  the  “Old  Man  of  the  Desert,”  “Old 
Father Eternity,” and “Grandfather of the Desert.” Signi?cantly, this name, 
when referred to in a certain tone or written with capital letters, designates 
the  earth  deity  of  Fremen  hearth  superstitions.  Sandworms  grow  to 
enormous size (specimens longer than 400 meters have been seen in the 
deep desert) and live to great age unless slain by one of their fellows or 
drowned in water, which is poisonous to them. Most of the sand on Arrakis 
is credited to sandworm action. ( 
See  Little Maker.) 
SHARI-A: 
  that  part  of  the  panoplia  propheticus  which  sets  forth  the 
superstitious ritual. ( See  Missionaria Protectiva.) 
SHADOUT: 
 well-dipper, a Fremen honori?c. 
SHAITAN: 
 Satan. 
SHIELD,  DEFENSIVE: 
  the  protective  ?eld  produced  by  a  Holtzman 
generator. This ?eld derives from Phase One of the suspensor-nulli?cation 
e?ect. A shield will permit entry only to objects moving at slow speeds 
(depending on setting, this speed ranges from six to nine centimeters per 
second) and can be shorted out only by a shire-sized electric ?eld. ( See 
Lasgun.) 
SHIELD WALL: 
 a mountainous geographic feature in the northern reaches of 
Ŕrrakis  which  protects  a  small  area  from  the  full  force  of  the  planet’s 
coriolis storms. 
SHIGAWIRE: 
  metallic  extrusion  of  a  ground  vine  ( Narvi  narviium )  grown 
only  on  Salusa  Secundus  and  III  Delta  Kaising.  It  is  noted  for  extreme 
tensile strength. 
SIETCH: 
 Fremen: “Place of assembly in time of danger.” Because the Fremen 
lived so long in peril, the term came by general usage to designate any 
cave warren inhabited by one of their tribal communities. 
SIHAYA: 
  Fremen:  the  desert  springtime  with  religious  overtones  implying 
the time of fruitfulness and “the paradise to come.” 
SINK: 
 a habitable lowland area on Arrakis surrounded by high ground that 
protects it from the prevailing storms. 
SINKCHART: 
 map of the Arrakis surface laid out with reference to the most 
reliable paracompass routes between places of refuge. ( 
See  Paracompass.) 
SIRAT: 
 the passage in the O.C. Bible that describes human life as a journey 
across a narrow bridge (the Sirat) with “Paradise on my right, Hell on my 
left, and the Angel of Death behind.” 
SLIP-TIP: 
  any  thin,  short  blade  (often  poison-tipped)  for  left-hand  use  in 
shield ?ghting. 
SNOOPER, POISON: 
 radiation analyzer within the olfactory spectrum and 
keyed to detect poisonous substances. 
SOLARI: 
 o?cial monetary unit of the Imperium, its purchasing power set at 
quatricentennial negotiations between the Guild, the Landsraad, and the 
Emperor. 
SOLIDO: 
  the  three-dimensional  image  from  a  solido  projector  using  360- 
degree  reference  signals  imprinted  on  a  shigawire  reel.  Ixian  solido 
projectors are commonly considered the best. 
SONDAGI: 
 the fern tulip of Tupali. 
SOO-SOO SOOK!: 
 water-seller’s cry on Arrakis. Sook is a market place. ( See 
Ikhut-eigh!) 
SPACING GUILD: 
 see  Guild. 
SPICE: 
 see  Melange. 
SPICE DRIVER: 
 any Dune man who controls and directs movable machinery 
on the desert surface of Arrakis. 
SPICE FACTORY: 
 see  Sandcrawler. 
SPOTTER CONTROL: 
 the light ornithopter in a spice-hunting group charged 
with control of watch and protection. 
STILLSUIT: 
  body-enclosing  garment  invented  on  Arrakis.  Its  fabric  is  a 
micro-sandwich  performing  functions  of  heat  dissipation  and  ?lter  for 
bodily  wastes.  Reclaimed  moisture  is  made  available  by  tube  from 
catchpockets. 
STILLTENT: 
 small sealable enclosure of micro-sandwich fabric designed to 
reclaim as potable water the ambient moisture discharged within it by the 
breath of its occupants. 
STUNNER: 
 slow-pellet projectile weapon throwing a poison- or drug-tipped 
dart.  E?ectiveness  limited  by  variations  in  shield  settings  and  relative 
motion between target and projectile. 
SUBAKH UL KUHAR: 
 “Are you well?” a Fremen greeting. 
SUBAKH UN NAR: 
 “I am well. And you?” traditional reply. 
SUSPENSOR: 
 secondary (low-drain) phase of a Holtzman ?eld generator. It 
nulli?es  gravity  within  certain  limits  prescribed  by  relative  mass  and 
energy consumption. 
TAHADDI AL-BURHAN: 
 an ultimate test from which there can be no appeal 
(usually because it brings death or destruction). 
TAHADDI CHALLENGE: 
 Fremen challenge to mortal combat, usually to test 
some primal issue. 
TAQWA: 
 literally: “The price of freedom.” Something of great value. That 
which a deity demands of a mortal (and the fear provoked by the demand). 
TAU,  THE: 
  in  Fremen  terminology,  that   oneness   of  a  sietch  community 
enhanced by spice diet and especially the tau orgy of oneness elicited by 
drinking the Water of Life. 
TEST-MASHAD: 
 any test in which honor (de?ned as spiritual standing) is at 
stake. 
THUMPER: 
 short stake with spring-driven clapper at one end. The purpose: 
to be driven into the sand and set “thumping” to summon shai-hulud. ( 
See 
Maker hooks.) 
TIDAL  DUST  BASIN: 
  any  of  the  extensive  depressions  in  the  surface  of 
Arrakis which have been ?lled with dust over the centuries and in which 
actual dust tides ( see  Sandtides) have been measured. 
TLEILAX: 
  lone  planet  of  Thalim,  noted  as  renegade  training  center  for 
Mentats; source of “twisted” Mentats. 
T-P: 
 idiomatic for telepathy. 
TRAINING: 
  when  applied  to  Bene  Gesserit,  this  otherwise  common  term 
assumes  special  meaning,  referring  to  that  conditioning  of  nerve  and 
muscle ( 
see  Bindu  and  Prana) which is carried to the last possible notch 
permitted by natural function. 
TROOP  CARRIER: 
  any  Guild  ship  designed  speci?cally  for  transport  of 
troops between planets. 
TRUTHSAYER: 
 a Reverend Mother quali?ed to enter truthtrance and detect 
insincerity or falsehood. 
TRUTHTRANCE: 
 semihypnotic trance induced by one of several “awareness 
spectrum” narcotics in which the petit betrayals of deliberate falsehood are 
apparent  to  the  truthtrance  observer  (Note:  “awareness  spectrum” 
narcotics are frequently fatal except to desensitized individuals capable of 
transforming the poison-con?guration within their own bodies.) 
TUPILE: 
 so-called “sanctuary planet” (probably several planets) for defeated 
Houses  of  the  Imperium.  Location(s)  known  only  to  the  Guild  and 
maintained inviolate under the Guild Peace. 
ULEMA: 
 a Zensunni doctor of theology. 
UMMA: 
  one  of  the  brotherhood  of  prophets.  (A  term  of  scorn  in  the 
Imperium, meaning any “wild” person given to fanatical prediction.) 
UROSHNOR: 
 one of several sounds empty of general meaning and which 
Bene Gesserit implant within the psyches of selected victims for purposes 
of  control.  The  sensitized  person,  hearing  the  sound,  is  temporarily 
immobilized. 
USUL: 
 Fremen: “The base of the pillar.” 
VAROTA: 
 famed maker of balisets; a native of Chusuk. 
VERITE: 
  one  of  the  Ecaz  will-destroying  narcotics.  It  renders  a  person 
incapable of falsehood. 
VOICE: 
  that  combined  training  originated  by  the  Bene  Gesserit  which 
permits an adept to control others merely by selected tone shadings of the 
voice. 
WALI: 
 an untried Fremen youth. 
WALLACH IX: 
 ninth planet of Laoujin, site of the Mother School of the Bene 
Gesserit. 
WAR OF ASSASSINS: 
 the limited form of warfare permitted under the Great 
Convention  and  the  Guild  Peace.  The  aim  is  to  reduce  involvement  of 
innocent  bystanders.  Rules  prescribe  formal  declarations  of  intent  and 
restrict permissible weapons. 
WATER BURDEN: 
 Fremen: a mortal obligation. 
WATERCOUNTERS: 
 metal rings of di?erent size, each designating a speci?c 
amount  of  water  payable  out  of  Fremen  stores.  Watercounters  have 
profound signi?cance (far beyond the idea of money) especially in birth, 
death, and courtship ritual. 
WATER  DISCIPLINE: 
  that  harsh  training  which  ?ts  the  inhabitants  of 
Arrakis for existence there without wasting moisture. 
WATERMAN: 
 a Fremen consecrated for and charged with the ritual duties 
surrounding water and the Water of Life. 
WATER  OF  LIFE: 
  an  “illuminating”  poison  ( see   Reverend  Mother). 
Speci?cally,  that  liquid  exhalation  of  a  sandworm  ( 
see   Shai-hulud) 
produced  at  the  moment  of  its  death  from  drowning  which  is  changed 
within the body of a Reverend Mother to become the narcotic used in the 
sietch tau orgy. An “awareness spectrum” narcotic. 
WATERTUBE: 
 any tube within a stillsuit or stilltent that carries reclaimed 
water into a catchpocket or from the catchpocket to the wearer. 
WAY, BENE GESSERIT: 
 use of the minutiae of observation. 
WEATHER SCANNER: 
 a person trained in the special methods of predicting 
weather on Arrakis, including ability to pole the sand and read the wind 
patterns. 
WEIRDING: 
 idiomatic: that which partakes of the mystical or of witchcraft. 
WINDTRAP: 
 a device placed in the path of a prevailing wind and capable of 
precipitating moisture from the air caught within it, usually by a sharp and 
distinct drop in temperature within the trap. 
YA HYA CHOUHADA: 
 “Long live the ?ghters!” The Fedaykin battle cry. Ya 
(now) in this cry is augmented by the hya form (the ever-extended now). 
Chouhada (?ghters) carries this added meaning of ?ghters 
 against  injustice. 
There  is  a  distinction  in  this  word  that  speci?es  the  ?ghters  are  not 
struggling  for  anything, but are consecrated  against  a speci?c thing—that 
alone. 
YALI: 
 a Fremen’s personal quarters within the sietch. 
YA!  YA!  YAWM!: 
  Fremen  chanting  cadence  used  in  time  of  deep  ritual 
signi?cance.  Ya  carries  the  root  meaning  of  “Now  pay  attention!”  The 
yawm form is a modi?ed term calling for urgent immediacy. The chant is 
usually translated as “Now, hear this!” 
ZENSUNNI: 
  followers  of  a  schismatic  sect  that  broke  away  from  the 
teachings of Maometh (the so-called “Third Muhammed”) about 1381 B.G. 
The Zensunni religion is noted chie?y for its emphasis on the mystical and 
a  reversion  to  “the  ways  of  the  fathers.”  Most  scholars  name  Ali  Ben 
Ohashi as leader of the original schism but there is some evidence that 
Ohashi may have been merely the male spokesman for his second wife, 
Nisai. 
CARTOGRAPHIC NOTES FOR MAP 
Basis for latitude: 
 meridian through Observatory Mountain. 
Baseline for altitude determination: 
 the Great Bled. 
Polar Sink: 
 500 m. below Bled level. 
Carthag: 
 about 200 km. northeast of Arrakeen. 
Cave of Birds: 
 in Habbanya Ridge. 
Funeral Plain: 
 open erg. 
Great Bled: 
 open, ?at desert, as opposed to the erg-dune area. Open desert 
runs from about 60° north to 70° south. It is mostly sand and rock, with 
occasional outcroppings of basement complex. 
Great Flat: 
 an open depression of rock blending into erg. It lies about 100 m. 
above the Bled. Somewhere in the Flat is the salt pan which Pardot Kynes 
(father  of  Liet-Kynes)  discovered.  There  are  rock  outcroppings  rising  to 
200 m. from Sietch Tabr south to the indicated sietch communities. 
Harg Pass: 
 the Shrine of Leto’s skull overlooks this pass. 
Old Gap: 
 a crevasse in the Arrakeen Shield Wall down to 2240 m.; blasted 
out by Paul Muad’Dib. 
Palmaries of the South: 
 do not appear on this map. They lie at about 40° 
south latitude. 
Red Chasm: 
 1582 m. below Bled level. 
Rimwall West: 
  a high scarp (4600 m.) rising out of  the Arrakeen  Shield 
Wall. 
Wind Pass: 
 cli?-walled, this opens into the sink villages. 
Wormline: 
  indicating  farthest  north  points  where  worms  have  been 
recorded. (Moisture, not cold, is determining factor). 
A Gollancz eBook 
Copyright © Frank Herbert 1969 
All rights reserved. 
The right of Frank Herbert to be identi?ed as the author of this work has been asserted by 
him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
This eBook ?rst published in Great Britain in 2010 by 
Gollancz 
The Orion Publishing Group Ltd 
Orion House 
5 Upper Saint Martin’s Lane 
London, WC2H 9EA 
An Hachette UK Company 
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
ISBN 978 0 575 10442 6 
This eBook produced by 
All characters and events in this publication are ?ctitious and any resemblance to real 
persons, living or dead, is purely coincidental. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of the publisher, nor to be 
otherwise circulated in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published 
without a similar condition, including this condition, being imposed on the subsequent 
purchaser. 
www.orionbooks.co.uk 
